                                           Appendix A

                         A New Relational Algebra

In this appendix, we describe a new relational algebra that we call A. The name A is a doubly
recursive acronym: It stands for ALGEBRA, which in turn stands for A Logical Genesis Explains
Basic Relational Algebra. As this expanded name suggests, A has been designed in such a way as
to emphasize, perhaps more clearly than previous algebras have done, its close relationship to and
solid foundation in the discipline of predicate logic. In addition, the abbreviated name A has
pleasing connotations of beginning, basis, foundation, simplicity, and the like—not to mention that
it is an obvious precursor to D.
       The algebra A differs from Codd’s original algebra [20-22] in four principal respects:

 ■    Cartesian product (referred to in this appendix as TIMES) is replaced by a natural join
      operator that, appealing to its counterpart in predicate logic, we call simply ◄AND►. The
      original TIMES becomes merely a special case of ◄AND►. Note: We adopt the
      convention of using solid arrowheads ◄ and ► to delimit A operator names, as in ◄AND►,
      in order to distinguish those operators from operators with the same name in predicate logic or
      Tutorial D or both. Also, in the case of ◄AND► in particular, do not be misled by the
      name: The ◄AND► operator of A is, of course, a relational operator (it operates on
      relations and returns a relation), whereas its predicate logic and Tutorial D counterparts are
      logical operators (they operate on propositions—or, more generally, predicates—and return a
      truth value). Analogous remarks apply to the A operators ◄OR► and ◄NOT► as well (see
      the next two bullet items).

 ■    UNION is replaced by a more general ◄OR► operator that does not require its operands to
      be of the same type. The original UNION becomes merely a special case of ◄OR►.

 ■    We include a relational complement operator, ◄NOT►. The availability of ◄NOT►
      allows us to drop the relational difference operator (MINUS), since that operator can easily be
      expressed in terms of ◄AND► and ◄NOT►.

 ■    We are able to dispense with restrict (WHERE), EXTEND, and SUMMARIZE, since these
      operators all become further special cases of ◄AND►. Note: EXTEND and SUMMARIZE
      were not included in Codd’s original algebra but were added subsequently [132].

       In addition to ◄AND►, ◄OR►, and ◄NOT►, A includes three operators called
◄RENAME►, ◄REMOVE►, and ◄COMPOSE►, which are discussed in the section after next.
It also includes a transitive closure operator, ◄TCLOSE►; however, this operator is essentially
identical to TCLOSE as discussed in Chapters 2 and 6, and we have little more to say about it in this
appendix.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      383
Appendixes                                                              Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


MOTIVATION AND JUSTIFICATION

In this section we explain our reasons for developing A and justify the departures from Codd’s
algebra identified in the previous section. Our explanations and notation are deliberately not too
formal (formal definitions appear in a later section). In particular, we show tuples not as sets of
<A,T,V> triples, as the formal apparatus of Chapter 4 would require, but as simple commalists of
values enclosed in angle brackets. For example, we use the expression <EX,DX> to mean a 2-tuple
in which EX denotes a certain employee and DX a certain department.
       Since we often appeal in what follows to ideas from predicate logic, using natural language
predicates as examples, a brief note on the terminology we use in that connection is in order:

    ■   First, where our examples include operands that are relvar references, the predicates for the
        corresponding relvars are relvar predicates as described in Chapter 2. For example, the
        predicate “Employee E works in department D” might be the relvar predicate for a relvar
        called WORKS_IN

    ■   Second, we refer to the parameters of a predicate as its free variables.1 For example, in the
        predicate “Employee E works in department D,” E and D are free variables.

    ■   Third, we use Greek derivatives involving the suffix -adic when referring to the number of
        free variables in a predicate, but Latin ones involving the suffix -ary when referring to the
        degree of a relation. For example, the predicate “Employee E works in department D” is
        dyadic, while a relation corresponding to that predicate is binary.

        The algebra A has been motivated by certain general objectives, the following among them:

    ■   For psychological reasons, we sought a collection of operators with immediate counterparts in
        logic and with less reliance on set theory (less than conventional relational algebra, that is) in
        their nomenclature. We feel that relational theory is better taught and understood this way;
        indeed, we have been dismayed at the widespread lack of appreciation in the database
        community at large of the logical foundations of relational theory, and we think it likely that
        this lack has contributed to the deficiencies we observe in available relational (or would-be
        relational) technology.

    ■   Previous algebras have had more than one operator corresponding to logical AND. We
        thought this apparent redundancy worth looking into, with a view to eliminating it.

    ■   We wanted all of the relational operators of Tutorial D to be mappable to expressions in A,
        for convenience and also for our own satisfaction (and we would strongly recommend that the
        same be true for any industrial-strength D as well). Full details of the mappings in question
        are deferred to the final section of this appendix, but some idea of what is involved can be
        found in examples prior to that section.


1
  We apologize for this slight terminological inconsistency, but in fact—as we have discussed in detail elsewhere
[78]—there seems to be almost no consensus on the use of terms in logic textbooks either.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                         384
Appendixes                                                     Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


      We now proceed to justify the four principal respects in which A differs from previous
algebras.

Dispensing with TIMES

In logic, when two predicates are connected by AND, attention must be paid to the names of the
free variables. Any free variable name that appears in both predicates must be understood to stand
for the same thing when it consequently appears more than once in the resulting predicate. For
example, consider the natural language predicates “Employee E works in department D” and
“Employee E works on project J.” The AND of these two predicates yields a triadic predicate, not a
tetradic one: namely, “Employee E works in department D and employee E works on project J.”
This latter predicate can perhaps be abbreviated to just “Employee E works in department D and on
project J,” to stress the fact that we cannot substitute some particular employee for the E that works
in department D without at the same time substituting that very same employee for the E that works
on project J. This observation regarding free variable names lies at the heart of the well-known
natural join operator (the ◄AND► operator in A).
       As for the classical TIMES operator, it is of course just a special case of natural join (which
hereinafter we abbreviate to simply join). More precisely, TIMES corresponds to the AND of two
predicates that have no free variables in common—for example, “Employee E works in department
D and project J has budget B.” TIMES as such can thus be discarded.
       We return for a moment to the predicate “Employee E works in department D and on project
J” to make another point. As already noted, that formulation of the predicate is really an
abbreviation. Now, it might be abbreviated still further, to just “Employee E works in department D
on project J.” However, that further abbreviation could lead to the erroneous conclusion that project
J is somehow “in” department D. In reference [21], Codd characterized this kind of error as the
connection trap, but it has since become known, at least in some circles, as the join trap instead—
rather unfairly, we feel, since it is not unique to join in particular, nor to relational operators in
general. In fact, it was precisely Codd’s point in reference [21] that the error is more likely to arise
in a nonrelational context than it is in a relational one.

Dispensing with UNION

We can combine natural language predicates with OR as well as AND. Thus, there is a ternary
relation corresponding to the triadic predicate “Employee E works in department D or employee E
works on project J.” If employee EX works in department DX, then <EX,DX,j> is a tuple in the
body of this relation for all possible projects j, regardless of whether employee EX actually works
on project j (and regardless of whether there is even a project j in the company at this time).
Likewise, if employee EX works on project JX, then <EX,d,JX> is a tuple in the body of this
relation for all possible departments d, regardless of whether employee EX actually works in
department d (and regardless of whether there is even a department d in the company at this time).
       Just as we introduce ◄AND► as the A counterpart of AND, therefore, we introduce ◄OR►
as the A counterpart of OR. As for the classical UNION operator, it is of course just a special case
of ◄OR►. More precisely, UNION corresponds to the OR of two predicates that have exactly the
same free variables—for example, “Employee E works in department D or employee E is on loan to
department D.” UNION as such can thus be discarded.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         385
Appendixes                                                     Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


      Note: We do not concern ourselves here with the computational difficulties that might arise
from our generalization of Codd’s UNION, because at this point we are only defining an algebra.
Various safety mechanisms can be (and normally are) imposed in practice to circumvent such
difficulties. For similar reasons, we also do not concern ourselves with the high degree of
redundancy that most relations produced by ◄OR► will exhibit.

Dispensing with MINUS

Let WORKS_IN be a relation with attributes E and D, where E is an employee and D is a
department, and let the corresponding predicate be “Employee E works in department D.” Then the
logical complement (◄NOT►) of this relation has a body that consists of all possible tuples of the
form <E,D> such that it is not the case that employee E works in department D. Note:
Computational difficulties arise here as they did with ◄OR►, but again we need not concern
ourselves with them at this juncture.
       To see that MINUS can now be discarded, consider the following example. Let WORKS_IN
be as above; let WORKS_ON be a relation with attributes E and J, where J is a project; and let the
predicate corresponding to WORKS_ON be “Employee E works on project J.” Now consider the
unary relation corresponding to the monadic predicate “Employee E works in some department but
works on no project at all.” In Codd’s algebra, we could obtain this relation by projecting both
WORKS_IN and WORKS_ON over their E attributes and then taking the appropriate difference. In
A, we first project WORKS_ON over E (see the next section for a discussion of projection), and
then we take the ◄NOT► of that projection; the corresponding predicate is “There does not exist a
project such that employee E works on that project.” This relation can then be joined
(“◄AND►ed”) with WORKS_IN, and the result projected over E, to obtain the desired final
result.

Dispensing with Restrict (WHERE), EXTEND, and SUMMARIZE

Restrict (WHERE), EXTEND, and SUMMARIZE all require certain operators to be invoked as part
of their execution. In the case of restrict, the operators in question return values (truth values, to be
precise) that are used to disqualify certain tuples from appearing in the result relation; in the case of
EXTEND and SUMMARIZE, they return values that are used as the basis for defining certain
attributes in the result relation.
       It occurred to us that it made sense, and could possibly be useful, to treat such operators as
relations. Consider an operator Op that is in fact a scalar function (a scalar function is an operator
for which every valid invocation returns exactly one result, and that result is a scalar value).
Suppose Op has n parameters. Then Op can be treated as a relation with n+1 attributes, one for
each parameter and one for the result. The attributes corresponding to the parameters clearly form a
key for this relation; however, that key is not necessarily the only one. For example, let PLUS be a
relation with attributes X, Y, and Z, each of type INTEGER, corresponding to the scalar function
“+” of integer arithmetic and to the predicate “X + Y = Z.” Then each of {X,Y}, {Y,Z}, and {Z,X}
is a key for relation PLUS; further, that relation contains exactly one 3-tuple <x,y,z> for every
possible combination of values x, y, and z that satisfies the predicate (i.e., such that x + y = z).
       Note, incidentally, that the relation PLUS can be regarded as an example of what in Chapters
5 and 6 we referred to as a relcon or relation constant: It is named, like a relvar, but unlike a relvar




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          386
Appendixes                                                              Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


it has a value that does not change over time. Of course, analgous remarks apply to the relational
representation of any function; the keys discussed in the previous paragraph are thus keys for a
relcon, not a relvar.
       Let us take a closer look at what is going on here. A scalar function is a special case of a
relation, of course, as the PLUS example illustrates. In fact, any relation can always be regarded as
an operator that maps from some subset of its attributes to the rest; and, if the mapping in question
is a functional (i.e., many-to-one) mapping specifically, then the relation can be regarded as a
function. In fact, since a set of n elements has 2ⁿ subsets, a relation of degree n can be regarded as
representing 2ⁿ different operators, some of which will be functions and some not (in general). For
example, PLUS can be regarded, among other things, as an operator that maps from Z to X and Y—
but of course that particular mapping is not a functional one (the functional dependencies Z  X
and Z  Y do not hold), and the corresponding operator is thus not a function.
       We now claim that, given the fact that operators can be treated as relations, and given also the
availability of the A operators ◄AND►, ◄REMOVE►, and ◄RENAME► (the latter two still to
be discussed), it is indeed the case that we can dispense with restrict, EXTEND, and
SUMMARIZE. We will justify this claim in the next section but one (“Treating Operators as
Relations”

◄REMOVE►, ◄RENAME►, AND ◄COMPOSE►

◄REMOVE►

◄REMOVE► is the A counterpart to the existential quantifier of predicate logic. It corresponds to
Codd’s project. However, it differs from project in that it specifies, not an attribute (or attributes,
plural) to be projected over, but rather an attribute to be “projected away”; it is equivalent to
projecting the relation in question over all of its attributes except the one specified. Our motivation
for this inversion, so to speak, with respect to Codd’s project is a psychological one—projecting a
relation with (say) attributes X and Y over attribute X is equivalent to existentially quantifying over
attribute Y. For example, the projection of WORKS_IN over E corresponds to the natural language
predicate “There exists some department D such that employee E works in department D.” We thus
feel that ◄REMOVE► is psychologically closer to our foundation in logic than project is. The
Third Manifesto, however, explicitly requires the language D not to arbitrate in this matter; rather,
projection over specified attributes and projection over all except specified attributes are required to
be equally easy to express.

◄RENAME►

The purpose of ◄RENAME► is, loosely, to rename some attribute of some relation. More
precisely, the ◄RENAME► operator takes a given relation and returns another that is identical to
the given one except that one of its attributes has a different name. Such an operator is required1 in
any concrete syntax for relational expressions in which attributes are distinguished by name, as they
are in A (and D).

1
    Or highly desirable, at any rate. As the next section shows, ◄RENAME► is in fact not a primitive operation.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       387
Appendixes                                                     Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


◄COMPOSE►

In addition to the operators discussed so far—◄AND►, ◄OR►, ◄NOT►, ◄REMOVE►, and
◄RENAME►—we have allowed ourselves the luxury (some might think) of including a “macro”
operator called ◄COMPOSE►. ◄COMPOSE► is a combination of ◄AND► and
◄REMOVE►, in which attributes common to the “◄AND►ed” relations are subsequently
“◄REMOVE►d.” The name ◄COMPOSE► is meant to be suggestive of the fact that relational
composition is a natural generalization of functional composition. (In case you are not familiar with
this latter notion, the composition of two functions f(...) and g(...), in that order, is the function
f(g(...)).) Note: Codd did in fact include a relational composition operator in his earliest papers [20-
21] but for some reason subsequently discarded it; we find it useful in support of our desire to treat
operators as relations. To be specific, it turns out that a certain degenerate form of composition can
be used to simulate the expression of operator invocations, as will be seen in the next section.

Closing Remarks

It should be obvious that A is relationally complete [22]. Previous algebras have needed six
operators for this purpose (typically RENAME, restrict, project, TIMES, UNION, and MINUS); we
have reduced that number to five. Moreover, thanks to our observation that operators can be treated
as relations, we have also avoided the need for EXTEND and SUMMARIZE; indeed, these
operators might have been added needlessly in the past, simply for lack of that observation. Points
arising:

 ■    As a matter of fact A is “more than” relationally complete, in the sense that its unconstrained
      ◄OR► and ◄NOT► operators permit the definition of relations that cannot be defined in
      previous algebras. The point is purely academic, of course, since as already noted the
      ◄OR► and ◄NOT► operations will not be totally unconstrained in practice, in order to
      avoid certain computational problems that would otherwise arise.

 ■    We do not actually need both ◄AND► and ◄OR► in order to achieve relational
      completeness, thanks to De Morgan’s Laws. For example, A ◄AND► B is identically equal
      to ◄NOT►((◄NOT► A) ◄OR► (◄NOT► B)), so we could dispense with ◄AND► if
      we included both ◄NOT► and ◄OR►. We could even collapse ◄NOT► and ◄OR►
      into a single operator, ◄NOR► (“neither A nor B”; equivalently, “not A and not B”).
      Equally well, of course, we could dispense with ◄OR► and collapse ◄AND► and
      ◄NOT► into a single operator, ◄NAND► (“not A or not B”). Overall, therefore, we could
      if desired reduce our algebra to just three operators: ◄RENAME►, ◄REMOVE►, and
      either ◄NOR► or ◄NAND► (plus ◄TCLOSE►).

 ■    In fact, we will show in the next section that we do not really need ◄RENAME► either;
      thus, we could in fact reduce our algebra still further to just the two operators ◄REMOVE►
      and either ◄NOR► or ◄NAND► (plus ◄TCLOSE►).

      Of course, we are not suggesting that all of the various operators that we claim can be
dispensed with should in fact be dispensed with in the concrete syntax of D—they are useful and




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        388
Appendixes                                                                   Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


convenient shorthands, generally speaking, and as a matter of fact RM Prescription 18 of our
Manifesto expressly requires that they (“or some logical equivalent thereof”) all be supported. But
we do suggest that such operators be explicitly defined as shorthands, for reasons of clarity and
simplicity among others [31].


TREATING OPERATORS AS RELATIONS

In this section we elaborate on our idea of treating operators as relations. Consider the relation
PLUS once again, with attributes X, Y, and Z, each of type INTEGER, corresponding to the
predicate “X + Y = Z.” Let TWO_AND_TWO be that relation whose body consists of just the
single 2-tuple
         { < X, INTEGER, 2 >, < Y, INTEGER, 2 > }

(we now revert to something closer to the formal notation for tuples—i.e., as sets of <A,T,v>
triples—introduced in Chapter 2). Then the expression
         TWO_AND_TWO ◄COMPOSE► PLUS

yields a relation whose body consists of the single 1-tuple
         { < Z, INTEGER, 4 > }

       Observe, therefore, that we have effectively invoked the “+” operator with arguments X = 2
and Y = 2 and obtained the result Z = 4.1 Of course, that result is still embedded as an attribute
value inside a tuple inside a relation (like all A operators, ◄COMPOSE► returns a relation); if we
want to extract that result as a pure scalar value, we will have to go beyond A per se and make use
of the operators (required by RM Prescriptions 7 and 6, respectively) for (a) extracting a specified
tuple from a specified relation (necessarily of cardinality one) and then (b) extracting a specified
attribute value from a specified tuple. In Tutorial D terms, for example, these extractions can be
performed as follows:
         Z FROM ( TUPLE FROM ( result ) )

where result denotes the result of evaluating the A expression TWO_AND_TWO ◄COMPOSE► PLUS.
       In other words, while it is certainly true that any given operator can be treated as a relation, it
will still be necessary to step outside the confines of the algebra per se in order to obtain the actual
result of some invocation of that operator. For present purposes, however, we are interested only in
treating operators as relations within a pure relational context; such a treatment allows us to explain
the classical relational operation EXTEND, for example, in a purely relational way (i.e., without
having to leave the relational context at all), as we now proceed to demonstrate.
       Consider the expression:
         TWO_AND_TWO ◄AND► PLUS


1
    Note that the result has a name, Z. We are still considering the implications of this fact for the language D.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          389
Appendixes                                                      Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


(this expression is the same as before, except that we have replaced ◄COMPOSE► by ◄AND►).
The result is a relation whose body consists of just the single 3-tuple:
      { < X, INTEGER, 2 >, < Y, INTEGER, 2 >, < Z, INTEGER, 4 > }

      It should be clear, therefore, that the original A expression is logically equivalent to the
following Tutorial D extension:
      EXTEND TWO_AND_TWO ADD ( X + Y AS Z )

This example should thus be sufficient to suggest how we can indeed dispense with EXTEND, as
claimed.
      Moreover, that very same expression TWO_AND_TWO ◄AND► PLUS is logically
equivalent to the following Tutorial D restriction:
      PLUS WHERE X = 2 AND Y = 2

This same example should thus also be sufficient to suggest how we can dispense with restrict,
again as claimed.
      As an aside, we remark that if we were to rename attributes X and Z of PLUS as Z and X,
respectively, then the expression TWO_AND_TWO ◄AND► PLUS would yield a relation whose
body consists of just the single 3-tuple:
      { < Z, INTEGER, 2 >, < Y, INTEGER, 2 >, < X, INTEGER, 0 > }

In other words, MINUS (not to be confused with the existing relational operator of the same name!)
would be just as good a name for our “relcon” as PLUS is, psychologically speaking.
      As for SUMMARIZE, it is well known that any given summarization can be expressed in
terms of EXTEND instead of SUMMARIZE per se (though the details are a little complicated and
we omit them here; see the final section of this appendix for further explanation). It follows that we
can dispense with SUMMARIZE as well.
      Now consider the following Tutorial D expression:
      R RENAME ( X AS Y )

(we assume here that R denotes a relation with an attribute called X and no attribute called Y).
Then the Tutorial D expression
      ( EXTEND R ADD ( X AS Y ) ) { ALL BUT X }

is semantically equivalent to the original RENAME expression. Thus, it should be clear that
◄RENAME► can be expressed in terms of EXTEND (which as we already know is basically just
◄AND►) and ◄REMOVE►, and hence is not primitive.
      Before we leave this section, we would like to stress the point that it is not just operators that
are scalar functions specifically that can be treated as relations. Consider the following examples:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          390
Appendixes                                                   Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


 ■    An example of an operator that is scalar but not a function is SQRT—“square root”—which,
      given a positive numeric argument, returns two scalar results (at least, we will assume so for
      the sake of this discussion). For example, SQRT(4.0) returns both +2.0 and -2.0.

 ■    An example of an operator that is a function but not scalar is ADDR_OF (“address of”),
      which, given an employee E, returns the address of that employee as a collection—more
      precisely, a tuple—involving four scalar values (STREET, CITY, STATE, and ZIP).

       Again we take a closer look. First, SQRT. SQRT can obviously be treated as a relation with
attributes X and Y, say, each of type RATIONAL (X  0). However, that relation is not a function
because the functional dependency X  Y does not hold: for example, the tuples (4.0,+2.0) and
(4.0,-2.0) both appear. (By contrast, the functional dependency Y  X does hold; SQRT can be
regarded as a function if it is looked at in the inverse—i.e., “square of”—direction.) Observe that
the relation contains:

 ■     For x = 0, exactly one tuple with X = x

 ■     For x > 0, exactly two tuples with X = x

 ■     For x < 0, no tuples at all with X = x

      It follows from the foregoing that the expression
      SQRT ◄COMPOSE► { { < X, RATIONAL, 4.0 > } }
effectively represents an invocation of the SQRT operator, but—in contrast to the situation in
conventional programming languages—the invocation in question returns two results. More
precisely, it produces a (unary) relation with the following body:
      { { < Y, RATIONAL, +2.0 > }, { < Y, RATIONAL, -2.0 > } }

(If desired, we could now go on to extract the individual scalar values +2.0 and -2.0 from this
relation.) One implication of this example is that a relational language such as D might reasonably
include an extended form of EXTEND that—unlike the traditional EXTEND—is not necessarily
limited to producing exactly one output tuple from each input tuple.
       By way of another example, consider the expression:
      SQRT ◄COMPOSE► { { < X, RATIONAL, -4.0 > } }

This expression also represents an invocation of the SQRT operator, but—again in contrast to the
situation in conventional programming languages—the invocation in question returns no result
(more precisely, it produces a relation with heading {Y RATIONAL} and body empty). In
conventional programming languages the invocation SQRT(-4.0) would give rise to a run-time
exception.
       Now we turn to ADDR_OF. This operator too can obviously be treated as a relation, this one
having attributes E, STREET, CITY, STATE, and ZIP, where {E} is a key. Note: The other four
attributes might form a key as well, if no two employees ever live at the same address (in which




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      391
Appendixes                                                                  Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


case the ADDR_OF relation would correspond to the inverse function that also happened to apply).
Of course, the name ADDR_OF would be a little questionable if such were the case; EMP_AT
might be just as appropriate, EMP_ADDR perhaps more so. The issue is merely psychological, of
course.1
      It follows from the foregoing that the expression
         { { < E, EMPLOYEE, e > } } ◄COMPOSE► ADDR_OF

(where e denotes some employee) effectively represents an invocation of the ADDR_OF operator,
but—in contrast to the situation in conventional programming languages—the invocation in
question returns a nonscalar result. One implication of this example is that a relational language
such as D might reasonably include an extended form of EXTEND that (unlike the traditional
EXTEND) is not necessarily limited to producing just one additional attribute.2


FORMAL DEFINITIONS

We now proceed to give formal definitions for the A operators discussed up to this point.3 First we
explain our notation (which is based on that introduced in Chapter 2, of course, and—unlike that of
previous sections—is now meant to be completely precise). Let r be a relation, let A be the name of
an attribute of r, let T be the name of the corresponding type (i.e., the type of attribute A), and let v
be a value of type T. Then:

    ■    The heading Hr of r is a set of attributes (i.e., ordered pairs of the form <A,T>). By
         definition, no two attributes in that set contain the same attribute name A.

    ■    Let tr be a tuple that conforms to Hr; i.e., tr is a set of ordered triples of the form <A,T,v>,
         one such triple for each attribute in Hr.

    ■    The body Br of r is a set of such tuples tr. Note that (in general) there will be some such
         tuples tr that conform to Hr but do not appear in Br.

The rest of our notation is meant to be self-explanatory.
      Observe that a heading is a set, a body is a set, and a tuple is a set (and we remind you from
Chapter 2 that every subset of a heading is a heading, every subset of a body is a body, and every
subset of a tuple is a tuple). A member of a heading is an attribute (i.e., an ordered pair of the form
<A,T>); a member of a body is a tuple; and a member of a tuple is an ordered triple of the form
<A,T,v>.



1
   Actually, analogous remarks apply to the SQRT example, where the name is again not very appropriate if the relation
is looked at in the inverse (“square of”) direction.
2
  Tutorial D does support such an operator. What is more, the additional attributes can be scalar, tuple, or relation
valued, or any combination.
3
    Greaves [97] gives definitions of all of the operators of A in terms of the formal specification language Z.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             392
Appendixes                                                      Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


      Now we can define the operators per se. Each of the definitions that follow consists of (a) a
formal specification of the rules, if any, that apply to the operands of the operator in question, (b) a
formal specification of the heading of the result of that operator, and (c) a formal specification of
the body of that result, followed by (d) an informal discussion of the formal specifications.

 ■    Let s be ◄NOT► r.
      Hs = Hr
      Bs = { ts : exists tr ( tr  Br and ts = tr ) }

      The ◄NOT► operator yields the complement s of a given relation r. The heading of s is the
      heading of r. The body of s contains every tuple with that heading that is not in the body of r.

 ■    Let s be r ◄REMOVE► A. It is required that there exist some type T such that <A,T>  Hr.
      Hs = Hr minus { <A,T> }
      Bs = { ts : exists tr exists v ( tr  Br and v  T and <A,T,v>  tr and
                                       ts = tr minus { <A,T,v> } ) }

      The ◄REMOVE► operator yields a relation s formed by removing a given attribute A from
      a given relation r. The operation is equivalent to taking the projection of r over all of its
      attributes except A. The heading of s is the heading of r minus the ordered pair <A,T>. The
      body of s contains every tuple that conforms to the heading of s and is a subset of some tuple
      of r.

 ■    Let s be r ◄RENAME► (A,B). It is required that there exist some type T such that <A,T> 
      Hr and that there exist no type T such that <B,T>  Hr.
      Hs = ( Hr minus { <A,T> } ) union { <B,T> }
      Bs = { ts : exists tr exists v ( tr  Br and v  T and <A,T,v>  tr and
                                       ts = ( tr minus { <A,T,v> } ) union
                                            { <B,T,v> } ) }

      The ◄RENAME► operator yields a relation s that differs from a given relation r only in the
      name of one of its attributes, which is changed from A to B. The heading of s is the heading
      of r except that the ordered pair <A,T> is replaced by the ordered pair <B,T>. The body of s
      consists of every tuple of the body of r, except that in each such tuple the triple <A,T,v> is
      replaced by the triple <B,T,v>.

 ■    Let s be r1 ◄AND► r2. It is required that if <A,T1>  Hr1 and <A,T2>  Hr2, then T1 =
      T2.
      Hs = Hr1 union Hr2
      Bs = { ts : exists tr1 exists tr2 ( ( tr1  Br1 and tr2  Br2 ) and
                                          ts = tr1 union tr2 ) }




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          393
Appendixes                                                               Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


        The ◄AND► operator is relational conjunction, yielding a relation s that in previous
        literature has been referred to as the (natural) join of the two given relations r1 and r2. The
        heading of s is the union of the headings of r1 and r2. The body of s contains every tuple that
        conforms to the heading of s and is a superset of both some tuple in the body of r1 and some
        tuple in the body of r2. We remark that the ◄AND► operator might logically be called the
        conjoin.

    ■   Let s be r1 ◄OR► r2. It is required that if <A,T1>  Hr1 and <A,T2>  Hr2, then T1 = T2.
        Hs = Hr1 union Hr2
        Bs = { ts : exists tr1 exists tr2 ( ( tr1  Br1 or tr2  Br2 ) and
                                            ts = tr1 union tr2 ) }

        The ◄OR► operator is relational disjunction, being a generalization of what in previous
        literature has been referred to as union (in the special case where the given relations r1 and r2
        have the same heading, the result s is in fact the union of those two relations in the traditional
        sense). The heading of s is the union of the headings of r1 and r2. The body of s contains
        every tuple that conforms to the heading of s and is a superset of either some tuple in the body
        of r1 or some tuple in the body of r2. We remark that the ◄OR► operator might logically
        be called the disjoin.

      We also define the “macro” operator ◄COMPOSE►. Let s be r1 ◄COMPOSE► r2
(where r1 and r2 are as for ◄AND►). Let the attributes common to r1 and r2 be A1, A2, ..., An (n
 0). Then s is the result of the expression
        ( r1 ◄AND► r2 ) ◄REMOVE► An ... ◄REMOVE► A2 ◄REMOVE► A1

Note that when n = 0, r1 ◄COMPOSE► r2 is the same as r1 ◄AND► r2, which is in turn the
same as r1 TIMES r2 in Codd’s algebra.
      Finally, we remind you that the A operator ◄TCLOSE► is essentially identical to the
TCLOSE operator already discussed in Chapters 2 and 6.


HOW Tutorial D BUILDS ON A

As noted in the body of the book, many—in fact, almost all—of the built-in relational operators in
Tutorial D are really just shorthands. In this section we justify this remark by showing how the
operators in question1 map to those of the relational algebra A defined in earlier sections. The
notation is intended to be self-explanatory, for the most part.

Transitive closure: The Tutorial D <tclose>
        TCLOSE r



1
  Or most of them, at any rate. For simplicity, however, we ignore operators like <n-adic join> that are clearly
equivalent to certain combinations of other operators.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        394
Appendixes                                                 Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


is semantically equivalent to the A expression
      ◄TCLOSE► r

Renaming: The Tutorial D <rename>
      r RENAME ( A AS B )

is semantically equivalent to the A expression
      r ◄RENAME► (A,B)

     Other Tutorial D <rename> formats are just shorthand for repeated application of the format
shown above.

Projection: The Tutorial D <project>
      r { ALL BUT A }

is semantically equivalent to the A expression
      r ◄REMOVE► A

      Other Tutorial D <project> formats are readily defined in terms of the format shown above.

Join: The Tutorial D <dyadic join>
      r1 JOIN r2

is semantically equivalent to the A expression
      r1 ◄AND► r2

      The Tutorial D <dyadic intersect> r1 INTERSECT r2 is just that special case of r1 JOIN r2
in which r1 and r2 have the same heading, so the ◄AND► operator of A takes care of
INTERSECT as well.

Compose: The Tutorial D <compose>
      r1 COMPOSE r2

is semantically equivalent to the A expression
      r1 ◄COMPOSE► r2

Union: The Tutorial D <dyadic union>
      r1 UNION r2

(where r1 and r2 have the same heading) is semantically equivalent to the A expression




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                  395
Appendixes                                                    Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


      r1 ◄OR► r2

Minus: The Tutorial D <minus>
      r1 MINUS r2

(where r1 and r2 have the same heading) is semantically equivalent to the A expression
      r1 ◄AND► ( ◄NOT► r2 )

Semijoin: The Tutorial D <semijoin>
      r1 SEMIJOIN r2       or     r1 MATCHING r2

is semantically equivalent to the Tutorial D expression
      ( r1 JOIN r2 ) { A, B, ..., C }

(where A, B, ..., C are all of the attributes of r1), and can therefore be expressed in A. Since this
latter expression involves only operators that have already been shown to be expressible in A, it
follows that semijoin can also be expressed in A. Note: A remark similar to the foregoing sentence
applies to many of the operators still to be discussed. We will let that one sentence do duty for all.

Semidifference: The Tutorial D <semiminus>
      r1 SEMIMINUS r2        or    r1 NOT MATCHING r2

is semantically equivalent to the Tutorial D expression
      r1 MINUS ( r1 SEMIJOIN r2 )

Division: The Tutorial D <divide> [dropped in Tutorial D Version 2]
      r1 DIVIDEBY r2 PER ( r3 )

(a Small Divide) is shorthand for the Tutorial D expression
      r1 { A1 } MINUS ( ( r1 { A1 } JOIN r2 { A2 } ) MINUS r3 { A1, A2 } ) { A1 }

(where A1 is the set of attributes common to r1 and r3 and A2 is the set of attributes common to r2
and r3), and can therefore be expressed in A. Likewise, the Tutorial D <divide>
      r1 DIVIDEBY r2 PER ( r3, r4 )

(a Great Divide) is shorthand for the Tutorial D expression
      ( r1 { A1 } JOIN r2 { A2 } ) MINUS ( ( r1 { A1 } JOIN
                                                r4 { A2, A3 } ) MINUS
                                           ( r3 { A1, A3 } JOIN r4 { A2, A3 } ) )
      { A1, A2 }




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       396
Appendixes                                                             Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


(where A1 is the set of attributes common to r1 and r3, A2 is the set of attributes common to r2 and
r4, and A3 is the set of attributes common to r3 and r4), and can therefore be expressed in A.

Extension: Let PLUS be a relation constant with heading
       { X INTEGER, Y INTEGER, Z INTEGER }

and with body consisting of all tuples such that the Z value is equal to the sum of the X and Y
values. Then the Tutorial D <extend>
       EXTEND r ADD ( A + B AS C )

(where we assume without loss of generality that A and B are attributes of r1 of type INTEGER) is
semantically equivalent to the Tutorial D expression
       r JOIN ( PLUS RENAME ( X AS A, Y AS B, Z AS C ) )

and can therefore be expressed in A. Analogous equivalents can be provided for all other forms of
<extend> (including forms in which the <exp> in the <extend add> is tuple or relation valued).
For example, the Tutorial D expression
       EXTEND r ADD ( TUPLE { A A, B B } AS C )
is semantically equivalent to the Tutorial D expression
       r JOIN s

where s is a relation with heading
       { A TA, B TB, C TUPLE { A TA, B TB } }

containing exactly one tuple for each possible combination of A and B values, in which the C value
is exactly the corresponding <A,B> tuple (TA and TB here being the types of attributes A and B,
respectively).

Restriction: Let ONE be a relation constant with heading
       { X INTEGER }

and with body consisting of a single tuple, with X value one. Then the Tutorial D <where>
       r WHERE A = 1

(where A is an attribute of r of type INTEGER) is semantically equivalent to the Tutorial D
expression
       r JOIN ( ONE RENAME ( X AS A ) )

1
  If they are not, we can effectively make them so by means of appropriate joins. An analogous remark applies to many
of our examples; for brevity, we will not make it every time.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     397
Appendixes                                                   Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


and can therefore be expressed in A.
      Now let GT be a relation constant with heading
      { X INTEGER, Y INTEGER }

and with body consisting of all tuples such that the X value is greater than the Y value. Then the
Tutorial D <where>
      r WHERE A > B

(where A and B are attributes of r of type INTEGER) is semantically equivalent to the Tutorial D
expression
      r JOIN ( GT RENAME ( X AS A, Y AS B ) )

and can therefore be expressed in A.
       More generally, consider the Tutorial D <where> r WHERE x (x here being an arbitrarily
complex <bool exp>). Let A, B, ..., C be all of the attributes of r mentioned in x. Let rx be a
relation whose body consists of all tuples of the form <A,B,...,C> that satisfy x. Then r WHERE x is
equivalent to r JOIN rx.

Summarization: The Tutorial D <summarize>
      SUMMARIZE r1 PER ( r2 ) ADD ( ss ( exp ) AS Z )

(where r2 has attributes A, B, ..., C; r1 has the same attributes and possibly more; and ss is any
<summary spec> except COUNT, EXACTLY, or EXACTLYD) is semantically equivalent to the
Tutorial D expression
       ( EXTEND r2 ADD ( r1 JOIN RELATION { TUPLE { A A, B B, ..., C C } } AS Y,
                         agg ( ( EXTEND Y ADD ( exp AS X ) ) { X }, X ) AS Z ) )
       { ALL BUT Y }

(where agg is identical to ss unless ss is COUNTD, SUMD, or AVGD, in which case agg is
COUNT, SUM, or AVG, respectively, and where the projection over X in the third line is included
only if ss is COUNTD, SUMD, or AVGD), and can therefore be expressed in A.
      Similarly,
      SUMMARIZE r1 PER ( r2 ) ADD ( ss ( exp1, exp2 ) AS Z )

(where ss is therefore EXACTLY or EXACTLYD) is semantically equivalent to the Tutorial D
expression
       ( EXTEND r2 ADD ( r1 JOIN RELATION { TUPLE { A A, B B, ..., C C } } AS Y,
                         EXACTLY ( exp1, ( EXTEND Y ADD ( exp2 AS X ) ) { X },
                                   X ) AS Z ) )
       { ALL BUT Y }

(where the projection over X in the fourth line is included only if ss is EXACTLYD), and can
therefore be expressed in A.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      398
Appendixes                                                      Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


      Similarly,
      SUMMARIZE r1 PER ( r2 ) ADD ( COUNT ( ) AS Z )

is semantically equivalent to the Tutorial D expression
       ( EXTEND r2 ADD ( r1 JOIN RELATION { TUPLE { A A, B B, ..., C C } } AS Y,
                         COUNT ( Y ) AS Z ) )
       { ALL BUT Y }

and can therefore be expressed in A.
      Note: Each of the foregoing SUMMARIZE expansions involves an invocation of some
aggregate operator (COUNT, for example, in the third case). But we have already seen, in the
section “Treating Operators as Relations,” that read-only operators can be implemented in A, and
our conclusion that SUMMARIZE can also be expressed in A is thus not undermined by our
reliance on those aggregate operators in the expansions.

Wrapping and unwrapping: The Tutorial D <wrap>
      r WRAP ( { A, B, ..., C } AS X )

is shorthand for the Tutorial D expression
       ( EXTEND r ADD ( TUPLE { A A, B B, ..., C C } AS X ) )
       { ALL BUT A, B, ..., C }

and can therefore be expressed in A. Likewise, the Tutorial D <unwrap>
      r UNWRAP ( X )

is shorthand for the Tutorial D expression
       ( EXTEND r ADD ( A FROM X AS A, B FROM X AS B, ..., C FROM X AS C ) )
       { ALL BUT X }

(where A, B, ..., C are all the attributes of X), and can therefore also be expressed in A.

Grouping and ungrouping: Let relation r have attributes A, B, ..., C, D, E, ..., F. Then the
Tutorial D <group>
      r GROUP ( { D, E, ..., F } AS X )

is shorthand for the Tutorial D expression
      ( EXTEND r ADD ( r AS RR , RELATION { TUPLE { A A, B B, ..., C C } } AS TX ,
                       RR COMPOSE TX AS X ) )
      { A, B, ..., C, X }

(where RR and TX are attribute names not already appearing in r), and can therefore be expressed in
A. Likewise, the Tutorial D <ungroup>




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     399
Appendixes                                                       Appendix A / A New Relational Algebra


      r UNGROUP ( X )

(where r has attributes A, B, ..., C, and X, and X in turn is a relation-valued attribute with attributes
D, E, ..., F) is shorthand for the Tutorial D expression
      ( EXTEND ( r COMPOSE s ) ADD ( D FROM Y AS D, E FROM Y AS E,
                                     ..., F FROM Y AS F ) )
      { A, B, ..., C, D, E, ..., F }

where s is a relation with heading
      { X RELATION { D, E, ..., F }, Y TUPLE { D, E, ..., F } }

and with body containing every possible tuple such that the Y value (a tuple) is a member of the
body of the X value (a relation). It follows that the original <ungroup> can be expressed in A.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            400