                                            Appendix B

                                 A Design Dilemma?

It is sometimes suggested that to consider relational domains as fully fledged data types, as The
Third Manifesto does, is to introduce a design dilemma. For example, suppose we need to deal with
employees, where every employee has an employee number (EMP#), a name (ENAME), a
department number (DEPT#), and a salary (SALARY). Consider the following Tutorial D
definitions (constraints deliberately omitted until further notice, for simplicity):
       TYPE EMP                                                /* “Design T” */
       POSSREP { EMP#       CHAR, ENAME      CHAR, DEPT# CHAR, SALARY MONEY ... } ;
       VAR EMP REAL                                            /* “Design R” */
       RELATION { EMP#       CHAR, ENAME      CHAR, DEPT# CHAR, SALARY MONEY } ... ;

      Clearly, we could define an EMP type (“Design T”) or an EMP relvar (“Design R”). The
question we address in this appendix is: Which approach is better? In other words, are there any
grounds for choosing one over the other?


ENCAPSULATION

One immediate difference between Design T and Design R is that the EMP type is encapsulated,
while the EMP relvar is not. Now, encapsulation is a term much used in the object world, and you
might already be familiar with it. However, you might also have noticed that we have not used it at
all in this book prior to this point—mainly because we do not find much need for it; in fact, we
believe it is the source of some confusion [64]. Be that as it may, we now explain it.
        Briefly, to say some object is encapsulated is simply to say the object in question has no user-
visible components, no matter how complex its physical representation—i.e., its internal encoding—
might be. (We are using the term object here in its generic sense, not its special object-oriented
sense.) Observe immediately, therefore, that all scalar values and variables are encapsulated by
definition. Tuple and relation values and variables, by contrast, are not encapsulated in this sense,
because they involve a set of user-visible attributes. In fact, an object is encapsulated if and only
if it is scalar; that is, encapsulated and scalar mean exactly the same thing. And this fact explains
why we find little use for the term: After all, it really just means users do not need to worry about
what they should not need to worry about: namely, internal encodings. Indeed, the idea that scalar
values and variables must be encapsulated is a logical consequence of the distinctions we draw
between model and implementation in general, and between type and representation in particular.
        Getting back to the example, the fact that the EMP type in Design T is encapsulated means
that values and variables of type EMP are scalar (they have no internal structure so far as the user is
concerned). Of course, we do have a set of operators available to us—THE_EMP#,
THE_SALARY, etc., in Tutorial D—that allow us to “get and set” certain employee properties, but
the availability of those operators says nothing about any internal structure employees might
possess, as we have explained at several places in the body of this book already.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        401
Appendixes                                                                       Appendix B / A Design Dilemma


      By contrast, the EMP relvar in Design R is definitely not encapsulated; that is, the user
definitely does know with Design R that employees have a component that is the EMP# attribute, a
component that is the SALARY attribute, and so on. Furthermore, of course, access to those
components is not by means of “THE_ operators” or anything of that nature but is more direct (or
what might be thought of as more direct, at any rate).


DISCUSSION

We now proceed to argue that, at least in the particular case under discussion, the “choice” is really
no choice at all. Observe first that Design T gives us no way to hire and fire!—thus, that design is
clearly insufficient as it stands. The reason is that type EMP is the set of all possible employees,1
and there is simply no way to insert new employees into that set or delete existing ones. To put it
another way, the set in question contains all possible values of the form EMP(e#,en,d#,sal), where
e#, en, d#, and sal are values of types CHAR, CHAR, CHAR, and MONEY, respectively,
regardless of whether any employee actually exists with the indicated properties. In other words
(loosely): Types are static. Again, if you are having difficulty with this idea, consider the simpler
example of type INTEGER. This type is the set of all possible integers, and it is clearly not
possible to insert new ones or delete existing ones. (Indeed, to pursue the point a moment longer,
suppose it were possible to “insert a new integer.” Where would that “new integer” come from?)
      It follows from the foregoing that Design T additionally requires an accompanying relvar,
perhaps looking like this:
       VAR EMP1 REAL RELATION { EMP EMP } KEY { EMP } ;

Relvar EMP1—“1” because it has just one attribute—contains a tuple for every employee currently
of interest (meaning, presumably, every employee who currently works for the company), and now
of course we do have a way to hire new employees and fire existing ones. Note carefully, however,
that relvar EMP1 does indeed have just one attribute, not four, thanks to encapsulation. Note too
that the KEY specification is almost a “no op”; in particular, it does not say that employee numbers
are unique.
       One implication of the Design T approach is thus that it tends to suggest that the database will
wind up containing a large number of single-attribute relvars: a fact that should perhaps give us
some pause (see further discussion in just a moment).
       Anyway, note that now not only can we “hire and fire employees,” we can also perform
operations analogous—though not identical—to the usual relational operations that we would have
performed on the relvar EMP if we had opted for Design R. Here are a couple of examples:

“Restriction”: Get employees with salary greater than $50,000.
       EMP1 WHERE THE_SALARY ( EMP ) > MONEY ( 50000 )



1
  More accurately, the set of all possible employee surrogates or representatives. The type EMP does not contain
actual employees, of course, but rather symbols—symbols that can be used as surrogates or representatives (inside a
database, for example) that stand for employees per se.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       402
Appendixes                                                                          Appendix B / A Design Dilemma


“Projection”: Get all employee-name/employee-salary pairs.
         ( EXTEND EMP1 ADD ( THE_ENAME ( EMP ) AS ENAME,
                             THE_SALARY ( EMP ) AS SALARY ) )
         { ENAME, SALARY }

      As you can see, however, the result in this second example has two attributes, not one! Thus,
it should be clear that:

    ■    Given the single-attribute relvar EMP1 required by Design T, we can create the four-attribute
         relvar EMP required by Design R (as a view, perhaps).

    ■    Furthermore, we would probably want to do exactly that in practice, because—for a variety of
         reasons—the four-attribute relvar is considerably more convenient than the single-attribute
         one.

Here to spell it out is a definition for that four-attribute view (let us call it EMP4):
         VAR EMP4 VIRTUAL ( ( EXTEND EMP1 ADD ( THE_EMP#   ( EMP ) AS EMP#,
                                                THE_ENAME ( EMP ) AS ENAME,
                                                THE_DEPT# ( EMP ) AS DEPT#,
                                                THE_SALARY ( EMP ) AS SALARY ) )
         { EMP#, ENAME, DEPT#, SALARY } ) KEY { EMP# } ;

      Note in particular that the KEY specification for EMP4 does state that employee numbers are
unique. In other words, we can start off with Design T, the type design, if we like, which means we
also need an associated single-attribute relvar—but we quickly find that, in effect, we have created
Design R (the relvar design) as well. So Design T implies that we wind up with everything in
Design R, plus the type EMP, plus the single-attribute relvar EMP1 as well. So what was the point
of opting for Design T in the first place? And what purpose is served, exactly, in Design T by the
type EMP and the single-attribute relvar EMP1?


FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS

What then is the criterion for making something a type and not a relvar? (We must have some
types, of course, if only for the obvious reason that relvars cannot be defined without them.) In our
opinion, this question is still somewhat open. However, we offer the following points for
consideration:

    ■    In conventional design terms, types correspond—loosely speaking—to properties and relvars
         to entities (or sets of properties and sets of entities, rather). Hence, if something is “only” a
         property, it should map to a type and not a relvar.
              The trouble with this idea, of course, is that “one person’s property is another person’s
         entity.” For example, consider colors. We would usually tend to think of (say) the color red
         as a property,1 not an entity, and we would therefore usually tend to map colors into a type.

1
    As a property of some entity, that is. The concept of a property in isolation makes no sense.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                  403
Appendixes                                                                          Appendix B / A Design Dilemma


        But some users might be very interested in the color red as an entity, with further properties of
        its own (shade, for example, or intensity)—in which case we might want to map colors into a
        relvar. Perhaps this is an example of a situation where we need both a type and a relvar.

    ■   Another important general point is that if “hire and fire” (or something analogous to “hire and
        fire”) is a requirement, then we are definitely talking about entities rather than properties, and
        we should definitely be aiming for a relvar design.
              Given this state of affairs, incidentally, it is odd that so many articles and presentations
        on object systems use employees, departments, and so forth as examples of object classes. An
        object class is a type, of course, and so those presentations are typically forced to go on to
        define a “collection” for those employees, a “collection” for those departments, and so on.
        What is more, those “collections” are collections of encapsulated objects, and they therefore
        effectively omit the all-important user-visible attribute names. As a consequence, they do not
        lend themselves very well to the formulation of ad hoc queries, declarative integrity
        constraints, and so forth—a fact that advocates of the approach themselves often admit,
        apparently without being aware that it is precisely the lack of user-visible attribute names (in
        effect, the encapsulation) that causes the difficulties.1 As a trivial example, consider the class
        (i.e., type) INTEGER and some corresponding collection of “currently interesting” integers.
        Does that collection have a name for its sole attribute? Probably not. And if not, we cannot
        (e.g.) join it to any other collection.

    ■   The following conjecture (previously articulated in the exercises in Chapter 14) is relevant to
        the issue too: If the only operators that apply to some given type are the ones that are
        provided “automatically”—THE_ operators, selectors, “=”, “:=”, and so on—then the type
        was probably not worth defining in the first place.

       Overall, we believe the most appropriate design will emerge if careful consideration is given
to the distinction between (a) declarative sentences in natural language, on the one hand, and (b) the
vocabulary used in the construction of such sentences on the other. As we showed in Chapter 2 (but
simplifying slightly here), it is unencapsulated tuples in relations that stand for those sentences, and
it is encapsulated domain values in attributes in those tuples that stand for particular elements—
typically nouns—in that vocabulary. To say it slightly differently (and to repeat what we said in
Chapter 2, albeit in different words): Domains, or types, give us values that represent things we
might wish to make statements about; relations give us ways of making those statements.
       Consider once again the EMP relvar of Design R. Suppose that relvar includes the tuple
        TUPLE { EMP# 'E7',            ENAME 'Amy', DEPT# 'D5', SALARY MONEY ( 60000 ) }

     The existence of this tuple in the relvar means, by definition, that the database includes
something that asserts that the following declarative sentence (statement) is true:


1
   In fact, object systems typically support ad hoc queries, etc., by breaking encapsulation and exposing physical
representations! To quote reference [107]: “All object DBMS products currently require that [object components]
referenced in ... queries be public [i.e., visible to the user].” Likewise, reference [7] says: “Query management ... is one
situation where violating encapsulation is almost obligatory.”




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                            404
Appendixes                                                            Appendix B / A Design Dilemma


      Employee E7, named Amy, is assigned to department D5 and earns a salary of $60,000.

       By contrast, consider the EMP type of Design T. Where the relvar of Design R allowed us to
insert the tuple just shown (loosely speaking), with the interpretation just explained, the type of
Design T allows us instead to execute the following selector invocation:
      EMP ( 'E7', 'Amy', 'D5', MONEY ( 60000 ) )

       This invocation does not of itself assert or deny the truth of anything at all. Rather, it
constitutes nothing more than a certain rather heavy-duty noun, something like “an E7-numbered,
Amy-named, D5-assigned, $60,000-earning employee.” Now, we can if we like form a 1-tuple
containing just that noun—i.e., that EMP value—and then effectively insert that 1-tuple into the
single-attribute relvar EMP1 that Design T additionally requires; to do so, however, is effectively
just to place a “There exists” in front of that noun, to make a declarative sentence, the truth of which
is thereby asserted.
       Of course, the “true fact” asserted by the 4-tuple in Design R is exactly the same as the “true
fact” asserted in different words (as it were) by the 1-tuple in Design T. However, designers might
profitably reflect on which of the two ways of asserting that fact is the more economical, the more
communicative, and the more tractable to further reasoning.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         405