                                                   Appendix D

                                    What Is a Database?

This book’s predecessor, reference [83], included text along the following lines:

      The first version of the Manifesto drew a distinction between database values and database variables, analogous
      to that between relation values and relation variables. It also introduced the term dbvar as shorthand for
      database variable. While we still believe this distinction to be a valid one, we found it had little direct relevance
      to other aspects of the Manifesto. We therefore decided, in the interests of familiarity, to revert to more
      traditional terminology.

      And we have continued to use the term database in the traditional way in the present book, of
course. However, reference [85] quotes the foregoing text and then adds:

      Now this bad decision has come home to roost! With hindsight, it would have been much better to “bite the
      bullet” and adopt the more logically correct terms database value and database variable (or dbvar), despite their
      lack of familiarity.

      That same reference gives arguments in support of this position, but those arguments need not
concern us here; the simple fact is, a database is a variable (its value changes over time), regardless
of whether we call it a “dbvar” or just a database. As William Shakespeare would agree,
differences in terminology (only) are not logical differences.


UPDATING THE DATABASE

It follows from the foregoing that when we update a database relvar, what we are really doing is
updating the dbvar that contains that relvar (for clarity, we adopt the term dbvar for the remainder
of this discussion). For example, the Tutorial D statement
      DELETE SP WHERE QTY < QTY(150) ;

updates the shipments relvar SP and thus “really” updates the entire suppliers-and-parts dbvar (the
“new” database value for that dbvar being the same as the “old” one except that certain shipment
tuples have been removed).
      Recall now, however, that in Chapter 6 (under RM Prescription 13) we said this:

      Do not make the mistake of thinking that a relation variable is a set of tuple variables. A
      relation variable is a variable whose permitted values are relation values; updating a relation
      variable replaces the current relation value of that variable by another such value. There is no
      notion, nor can there be any notion, that “updating a relation variable” really means updating
      some tuple variable(s) within the relation variable in question.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           413
Appendixes                                                                Appendix D / What Is a Database?


      This idea—i.e., that it makes no sense to regard, e.g., a relation variable as a collection of
tuple variables—is considered at more length in reference [79]. But if it makes no sense to regard a
relvar as a collection of tuple variables or “tuplevars,” how can it make sense to regard a dbvar as a
collection of relvars? Are we not being inconsistent here?
      A point of clarification: Before we try to answer these questions, we need to make it clear
that when we say the database is a variable, we are speaking conceptually. The Manifesto includes
no prescription regarding the ability to define such variables or the ability to operate on them (other
than indirectly, via database relvars); it does not even have anything to say regarding the names of
such variables. And Tutorial D has nothing to say about such matters either. To quote Chapter 5:

         [Neither] databases nor catalogs are explicitly mentioned anywhere in the syntax of Tutorial
         D.


THE DATABASE IS A TUPLE

We now claim there is no inconsistency in our position after all. (Were you surprised?) While we
might say, informally, that a dbvar is a variable that contains other variables (viz., relvars), we stress
the fact that such a characterization is indeed only informal. We claim further that there is a more
formal and more accurate way to describe the situation—viz.:

                                                  A dbvar is a tuplevar

       The tuplevar in question has one attribute for each real relvar1 in the database (and no other
attributes), and each of those attributes is relation valued. In the case of suppliers and parts, for
example, we can think of the entire dbvar as a tuplevar of the following tuple type:
         TUPLE { S      RELATION { S# S#, SNAME NAME, STATUS INTEGER, CITY CHAR },
                 P      RELATION { P# P#, PNAME NAME, COLOR COLOR, WEIGHT WEIGHT,
                                   CITY CHAR },
                     SP RELATION { S# S#, P# P#, QTY QTY } }

      Suppose we call the tuplevar in question SPDB. Then the DELETE example from the
previous section might be regarded as shorthand for the following <tuple update>:
         UPDATE SPDB ( SP := SP WHERE NOT ( QTY < QTY(150) ) ) ;

         And this <tuple update> in turn is shorthand for the following <tuple assign>:
         SPDB := UPDATE SPDB ( SP := SP WHERE NOT ( QTY < QTY(150) ) ) ;

         This <tuple assign> expands to:
         SPDB := ( ( EXTEND SPDB ADD ( SP WHERE NOT ( QTY < QTY(150) ) AS NEWSP ) )
                   { ALL BUT SP } ) RENAME ( NEWSP AS SP ) ;



1
    We ignore virtual relvars in this appendix, for simplicity.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           414
Appendixes                                                        Appendix D / What Is a Database?


      Or equivalently to:
      SPDB := TUPLE { S (    S FROM SPDB ), P ( P FROM SPDB ),
                      SP ( ( SP FROM SPDB ) WHERE NOT ( QTY < QTY(150) ) ) } ;

      In sum: A dbvar is a tuplevar, and a database (i.e., the value of some given dbvar at some
given time) is a tuple. What is more, given a <relation assign> of the form
      R := r

(where R is a <relation target> and r is a <relation exp>), we can say that the expression R
appearing on the left side is really a pseudovariable reference!—the <relation assign> is shorthand
for an assignment that “zaps” one component of the corresponding dbvar (or tuplevar).
      We close this section, and this appendix, by noting that Exercise 1.1 (see Chapter 1) asked for
a precise definition of the term database. This appendix provides such a definition—one that is
possibly rather different from what you might have expected.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        415