                                            Appendix E

                                     View Updating

Every scientific discipline has its share of unsolved problems. In mathematics, for example, nobody
has succeeded in over 100 years in either proving or disproving the Riemann Hypothesis; in
computer science, the “P = NP” question is still open after some 35 years; in physics and
cosmology, the long search for a “theory of everything” remains just that, a search (some might
dispute this last claim). Thus, no book that addresses the frontiers of some field of scientific
endeavor can claim to have all the answers, as it were. In this appendix, we examine an aspect of
the database field, view updating, where there are certainly still some unresolved issues. Of course,
we do not mean to suggest that the problem of view updating is in the same league as the Riemann
Hypothesis or the “P = NP” issue or some hypothetical “theory of everything”—but we do believe it
merits attention as a matter of considerable practical and theoretical interest, and we continue to
work on it. This appendix is a progress report on that activity.

                                      ———  ———

In the interests of full disclosure, we must now explain that view updating is an area where—
unusually!—the authors of this book are not yet in full agreement. Given the importance of the
subject matter, however, we decided to go ahead and set our thoughts down in writing anyway, with
the hope of at least getting some debate going among those who are interested in such matters. We
also decided to present Date’s opinions first and Darwen’s, as an alternative perspective, second.
For obvious reasons, we also decided, again unusually, to write in the first person singular where
appropriate.
      All opinions expressed in what follows, up to the section “Darwen’s Approach,” are thus
Date’s specifically.


DATE’S APPROACH

I claim that constraints—specifically, database constraints—are the key to the view updating
problem, and I therefore propose to take a closer look at such constraints in this appendix. In fact, I
need to cover quite a lot of preliminary material before I can get to view updating as such. I should
say too that I have been down numerous blind alleys in this investigation! It would be much too
tedious to document all of those blind alleys here, but it would be dishonest not to admit that my
previous writings on this topic have suffered from a good deal of error and confusion. And there
are still, to repeat, some unresolved issues (appropriately flagged in what follows). But I feel
enough issues have been resolved to make me cautiously optimistic about the remainder. Despite
its incompleteness, therefore, I explicitly regard what follows as superseding all of my previous
writings on this subject.
       Of course, a great deal of work has been done on view updating by other researchers. I do not
claim to be familiar with all of that prior work, but I have not seen a treatment in the literature that




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         416
Appendixes                                                                 Appendix E / View Updating


is the same as, or even close to, the one that follows—with the exception of that by David
McGoveran and myself in reference [88], which as I have already indicated I see the treatment that
follows as superseding (or extending and superseding, rather). Note: McGoveran’s proposals in his
patent application [114] are broadly consistent with what follows, but some of the details seem to be
different, and I will certainly be going into more specifics than reference [114] does.


ASSUMPTIONS AND NOTATION

For simplicity I adopt a number of assumptions and notational abbreviations in what follows. To be
specific:

 ■    As you might have noticed already, I (usually) use the term view instead of the Manifesto term
      virtual relvar—though I retain the Manifesto term real relvar for a relvar that is not a view,
      and I continue to use the generic term relvar to mean a real relvar or a view or both, as the
      context demands.

 ■    I use uppercase italic letters for generic relvar names (among other things) and corresponding
      lowercase italic letters for corresponding relvar values. Thus, for example, relvar R has
      current value r.

 ■    I take the unqualified term constraint to mean, specifically, what Chapter 2 called a total
      relvar constraint, barring explicit statements to the contrary.

 ■    I use RC to denote the constraint for relvar R. I also use RX and RY to denote what I will be
      calling the X constraint for R and the Y constraint for R, respectively (see the section “A
      Closer Look at Constraints” later in this appendix for an explanation of these latter terms).

 ■    I use the symbol “≡” to mean “is equivalent to” or “is defined as” or “be defined as” or “can
      be defined as” or just “defined as,” as the context demands.

      I also abbreviate several Tutorial D keywords and syntactic constructs:

 ■    I use the symbols “”, “”, and “-” to denote INTERSECT, UNION, and MINUS,
      respectively.

 ■    I usually, though not exclusively, use the symbols “&”, “|”, and “¬” to denote AND, OR, and
      NOT, respectively.

 ■    I use the symbol “ø” to denote an empty relation.

 ■    I use the symbol “” to denote logical implication, thereby writing, e.g., “p  q” instead of
      “IF p THEN q END IF” (the Tutorial D analog).

 ■    I use dot qualification to denote the operation of extracting an attribute value from a tuple,
      thereby writing, e.g., “t.A” instead of “A FROM t” (the Tutorial D analog).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            417
Appendixes                                                                              Appendix E / View Updating


    ■   As elsewhere in this book, I use a simplified syntax for tuples—more precisely, tuple selector
        invocations—thereby writing, e.g., <S1,P1,300> instead of
        TUPLE { S# S#('S1'), P# P#('P1'), QTY QTY(300) }

        (the Tutorial D analog).

    ■   I use a syntax for constraints that is directly based on that of predicate logic, instead of the
        more algebraic style used in the body of the book. I also introduce some shorthands. To be
        specific, I use the expression
        FORALL t  R ( p )

        (“all tuples t in R are such that p”) as shorthand for
        FORALL t ( ( t  R )  ( p ) )

        Analogously, I use the expression
        EXISTS t  R ( p )

        (“there exists a tuple in R such that p”) as shorthand for
        EXISTS t ( ( t  R ) & ( p ) )

        Note: The expressions FORALL t  R and EXISTS t  R in these shorthands are examples of
        what reference [22] calls range-coupled quantifiers.


A CLOSER LOOK AT RELATIONAL ASSIGNMENT

Note: This section is based on ideas first suggested by David McGoveran.
      To say that V is a variable is to say that V is assignable to (i.e., updatable).1 As stated in
Chapter 3, moreover, after assignment of value v to variable V, the comparison v = V is required to
evaluate to TRUE (The Assignment Principle), otherwise the assignment fails (“is undone”) and V
retains its previous value.
      Now, the foregoing remarks are true of variables in general and therefore of relvars in
particular. That is, the way we update a relvar R is precisely by means of a relational assignment in
which the target is R:
        R := exp

     R here is a relvar reference (denoting relvar R, of course) and exp is an expression that
denotes some relation x that is to be assigned to that relvar R. After the assignment, R = x must

1
   In this connection, I remind you that, as noted in Chapter 6, if some relvar (in particular, some view) turns out to be
intrinsically nonupdatable—as opposed to being nonupdatable simply because of, e.g., some constraint violation—then
it is hardly appropriate to call it a “relvar” (i.e., a variable) in the first place.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           418
Appendixes                                                                   Appendix E / View Updating


evaluate to TRUE; also, the constraint RC must be satisfied (The Golden Rule). If either of these
requirements is violated, the update is undone and R retains its previous value. Note: Strictly
speaking, The Golden Rule applies to the database in its entirety. Here I am appealing to what
Chapter 2 called a weaker form of that rule (a logical consequence of the more general version),
which states that no assignment statement can ever leave any relvar in a state that violates its own
constraint.
      From this point forward, I take the term assignment to mean a relational assignment
specifically.
      Next I remind you that INSERT, DELETE, and UPDATE are really just shorthands for
certain assignments. Again consider the assignment:
      R := exp

      It is intuitively obvious that the expression exp is logically equivalent to, and can therefore be
replaced by, an expression of the form
      r - d  i

where:

 ■    r is the value of R before the assignment, d is a set of tuples to be deleted from R, and i is a set
      of tuples to be inserted into R after that deletion has been done. (More precisely, d and i, like
      r, are really relations, and the “sets of tuples” I am talking about are really the bodies of those
      relations. I will ignore this detail in what follows.)

 ■    d is a subset of r (i.e., d-r = ø), because deleting a tuple that was not there in the first place has
      no logical effect; in other words, there is no point in making d any bigger than it need be.

 ■    r and i are disjoint (i.e., ri = ø), because inserting a tuple that was already there has no
      logical effect; in other words, there is no point in making i any bigger than it need be.

 ■    d and i are disjoint (i.e., di = ø), because there is no point in deleting a tuple and then
      inserting it again all as part of the same assignment.

     I now show that, for a given assignment R := r-di and a given initial value r of R, d and i are
unique. Suppose, contrariwise, that
      r - d1  i1 = r - d2  i2

for some d1 ≠ d2 and/or some i1 ≠ i2, where (in accordance with the conditions spelled out above),
d1-r = d2-r = ri1 = ri2 = d1i1 = d2i2 = ø. Then:

 ■    Let t  d1-d2. Since d1-r = ø, t  r-d2 and t  r-d1. Hence t  r-d2i2; therefore t  r-d1i1.
      Since t  r-d1, t  i1. But then d1i1 ≠ ø, which is a contradiction; hence no such t exists and
      d1-d2 = ø (i.e., d1 is a subset of d2). A similar argument shows that d2 is a subset of d1.
      Hence d1 = d2.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            419
Appendixes                                                                  Appendix E / View Updating


 ■    We thus have r-d1 = r-d2 = z, say. Then zi1 = zi2. But ri1 = ø, so (r-d1)i1 = ø, so
      zi1 = ø. A similar argument shows that zi2 = ø. Hence, since zi1 = zi2, i1 = i2.

       It follows from the foregoing that if x is the relation to be assigned to R, then x can be
expressed as either r-di or ri-d (i.e., it makes no difference whether we do the delete first or the
insert). It further follows that, given r and x, we have:
      d    =   r - x
      i    =   x - r

      I can now define the operations INSERT and DELETE: An INSERT is an assignment for
which d = ø, a DELETE is an assignment for which i = ø (and an UPDATE is a DELETE followed
by an INSERT). In other words:
 ■        INSERT i INTO R     ≡       R := R  i   /* syntax */
                              ≡       R := r  i   /* semantics */

 ■        DELETE d FROM R     ≡       R := R - d   /* syntax */
                              ≡       R := r - d   /* semantics */

where ir = d-r = ø. Moreover:

 ■    After INSERT, the comparison R = ri and the constraint RC must both evaluate to TRUE.

 ■    After DELETE, the comparison R = r-d and the constraint RC must both evaluate to TRUE.

       Note: I deliberately do not use Tutorial D INSERT and DELETE syntax here. Also, note
that in Chapter 6 we did not legislate on whether it was an error to try to insert a tuple that was
already present or delete one that was not, but here I do (because I require that ir = d-r = ø). In the
case of DELETE, however, I observe that in practice the operation will usually be expressed in the
form DELETE R WHERE p, in which case d is necessarily a subset of r, and we have:
 ■        DELETE R WHERE p        ≡   R := R WHERE ¬ ( p )      /* syntax */
                                  ≡   R := r WHERE ¬ ( p )      /* semantics */

       It follows from all of the above that it would be sufficient to investigate INSERT and
DELETE operations specifically rather than general assignment, and for a long time I tried to do
exactly that (I felt it was a good idea because INSERT and DELETE are, at least arguably,
intuitively easier to understand than assignment in general). But this idea turned out to be one of
the blind alleys I mentioned in the introduction to this appendix. One reason it was a blind alley
had to do with “nested updates”; I will be discussing that topic in detail in a later section, but the
point should be intuitively understandable even without that detailed discussion (though no harm is
done if not). Consider an update of the form INSERT i INTO R, where R ≡ AB. It should be clear
that this update might involve the “insertion” of a tuple t into A (say) that in fact already exists in A,
thereby violating the precondition for INSERT. Likewise, a request of the form DELETE d FROM
R where R ≡ AB might involve the “deletion” of a tuple t from B (say) that in fact does not exist in
B, thereby violating the precondition for DELETE. In other words, it turned out to be useful to talk
in terms of both:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           420
Appendixes                                                                           Appendix E / View Updating


    ■    INSERT-type assignments of the form R := ri where ir is not necessarily equal to ø1

    ■    DELETE-type assignments of the form R := r-d where d-r is not necessarily equal to ø

      In what follows, therefore, I will talk mostly in terms of INSERT- and DELETE-type
assignments instead of INSERTs and DELETEs as such (note that I do still find it helpful to
consider the two cases separately). In other words, I will be discussing view updating in terms of
assignment after all. Observe, however, that the assignments in question will be multiple
assignments, in general; for example, updating R ≡ AB will usually involve updating both A and B
(a double assignment). Observe too that UPDATE in particular can be thought of as a double
assignment—to be specific, an UPDATE on R can be thought of as an assignment of the form R :=
R-d, R := Ri. (Though this double assignment in fact reduces to the single assignment R := WITH
R-d AS R: Ri, as explained in Chapter 6.)

A MODEL OF UPDATING

Consider the assignment
         R := x

where R is a real relvar. Clearly, the semantics of this assignment can be explained in terms of the
following conceptual algorithm:

    1.    Assign x to R.

    2.   (Check The Assignment Principle.) If R = x evaluates to FALSE, undo the assignment.

    3.   (Check The Golden Rule.) If RC evaluates to FALSE, undo the assignment.

      I remark in passing that conceptual algorithms along the foregoing lines appear at several
points in what follows. In some cases, some of the steps can safely be omitted (for example, it
might sometimes be impossible for The Assignment Principle to be violated); however, I will
usually show all steps for explicitness.
      Now recall The Principle of Interchangeability, which was mentioned briefly under RM
Prescription 14 in Chapter 6: There must be no arbitrary and unnecessary distinctions between
views and real relvars (emphasis on arbitrary and unnecessary). It follows that updates on views in
particular must behave as far as possible as if those views were real relvars. By way of example, let
R ≡ AB, and consider the update INSERT i INTO R. R is supposed to “look and feel” as far as




1
  Footnote 1 on page 161 raises the possibility of supporting two distinct “insert” operators—INSERT, which does not
treat an attempt to insert an existing tuple as an error, and D_INSERT, which does. If this suggestion is adopted, all
references to INSERT and INSERT-type assignment in my portions of this appendix could be replaced by references to
D_INSERT and INSERT, respectively.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       421
Appendixes                                                                            Appendix E / View Updating


possible just like a real relvar, and so it follows that the semantics of the INSERT must be as
defined by the following conceptual algorithm:1

    1. (Materialize R.) Create a temporary real relvar R' with initial value r (= ab, where a and b are
         the current values of A and B, respectively).

    2. (Update R'.) INSERT i INTO R'.

    3. (Recompute R.) Given the new value ri of R', assign the new values a' = (a-b)(ri) and b' =
         (b-a)(ri) to A and B, respectively, and thereby obtain the new value a'b' for R.

    4. Check The Assignment Principle for R (a'b' should be equal to ri = (ab)i).

    5. Check The Golden Rule for A and B (a' and b' should satisfy constraints AC and BC,
        respectively). Note that if a' and b' do satisfy AC and BC, respectively, then r' = a'b' will
        necessarily satisfy RC. Note: I assume here and throughout this paper that any constraints
        expressed directly in terms of a view R are replaced, at least conceptually, by equivalent
        constraints expressed in terms of the relvar(s) in terms of which R is defined; in effect,
        therefore, I assume that constraints refer to real relvars only. This simplifying assumption
        does not prevent us from talking in terms of “the constraint RC for a view R” when we need to
        do so, of course.

    6. Discard R'.

      The algorithm for DELETE d FROM R is analogous.
      Algorithms such as those outlined above constitute a model for how updating is supposed to
work, and that model at least implicitly underpins everything I have to say in the rest of this
appendix. Of course, I do not mean the DBMS actually has to execute those algorithms as such;
rather, it is free to perform updates in whatever way it likes, just so long as whatever it does do is
guaranteed to give the result prescribed by the model. Indeed, in what follows I usually give what
might be seen as implementation algorithms (albeit ones that are far from optimal) instead of
relying on the conceptual algorithms of the model as such. For example, the DBMS might—and
often will, as I will show in the next section—be able to tell “ahead of time” that some tuple
presented for insertion would cause the target relvar to violate its own constraint; thus, it (the
DBMS) might be able to “undo” the update by simply not performing it in the first place. These
remarks apply to both real relvars and views.




1
  Note that the definitional trick used in this algorithm—that of introducing a temporary target—could be used as the
basis for an alternative definition of multiple assignment, one that might be simpler than that given in Chapter 4.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        422
Appendixes                                                                              Appendix E / View Updating


A CLOSER LOOK AT CONSTRAINTS

Now I turn to the promised closer look at constraints. I begin with some definitions. Let DBC be
the total database constraint for some database DB. Without loss of generality, we can assume DBC
takes the following form
         ( DBC1 ) & ( DBC2 ) & ... & ( DBCn ) & TRUE

where (a) each DBCi (i = 1, 2, ..., n) in turn takes the form1
         ( Pi1 ) | ( Pi2 ) | ... | ( Pim )

and (b) each Pij (j = 1, 2, ..., m) is a nonnegated proposition of one of the following forms:
         FORALL t  R ( RQij )

or
         EXISTS t  R ( RQij )

      Here R is some relvar R in database DB and RQij is a predicate with sole parameter t (and I
rely on the fact that leading NOTs can be eliminated, thanks to the equivalence ¬(EXISTS x(p)) ≡
FORALL x(¬(p))). Note: As previously stated, I assume for simplicity that every DBCi is
formulated in terms of real relvars only; in fact, I assume until further notice that all relvars are real
ones.
      Now set to TRUE each DBCi in DBC for which none of the constituent propositions Pij
mentions relvar R at any level of nesting. Next, for each DBCi in DBC, set to FALSE each Pij in
DBCi that fails to mention relvar R at any level of nesting. What results is the total relvar
constraint, RC, for relvar R.
      I now conjecture2 that, in general, RC is logically equivalent to an expression of the form
(RZ)&(RY), where:

    ■    RZ is either simply TRUE or it takes the form
         FORALL t  R ( RX )

         where RX is quantifier-free and thus has the property that, given any tuple t with the same
         heading as R, it can be evaluated for that tuple t by examining just that tuple t in isolation.

    ■    RY (which also might be simply TRUE) has the property that, given any relation r assignable
         to R, it can be evaluated for that relation r, albeit not without examining other relvars
         referenced in RY.


1
  It might help to think of each DBCi, informally, as being a database constraint as explicitly declared in concrete
syntax (loosely, the total database constraint is the AND of all such explicitly declared constraints).
2
    Throughout this appendix I use the term conjecture in connection with issues that might need further investigation.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                            423
Appendixes                                                                                Appendix E / View Updating


       I assume that if R is a real relvar, then RX and RY are known (I will consider the case of a
virtual relvar later), and I will refer to them in what follows as “the X and Y constraints” for R.
Note: In practice it would probably be desirable for RY to include no nontrivial “subconstraint,” as
it were, with the same properties as RZ—in other words, it would be desirable for RZ to be the
maximal subconstraint of RC to possess the properties in question—but I do not rely on RZ being
maximal in this (or any other) sense. But no harm is done, logically speaking, if we replace RZ by
TRUE and RY by RC throughout; my aim in splitting RC into RX and RY is merely (a) to make
certain explanations intuitively easier to understand, (b) to provide a basis for certain simple
optimizations, and (c) to mirror, in certain respects, the way we define constraints in practice.1
       I now illustrate these ideas with a series of examples. For simplicity I assume in each case
that the particular constraint under discussion is the total relvar constraint, barring explicit
statements to the contrary.

    1.   Supplier status is greater than zero. Formal expression:
         FORALL t  S ( t.STATUS > 0 )

         For this example, the X and Y constraints SX and SY are t.STATUS > 0 and TRUE,
         respectively. Overall, the constraint says: If we insert some tuple into S, then after that
         INSERT every tuple in S must have status greater than zero; likewise, if we delete some tuple
         from S, then after that DELETE every tuple in S must have status greater than zero. Two
         obvious optimizations are possible:

         ●   If we attempt to insert some tuple t, the DBMS can reject the attempt “ahead of time”
             (i.e., before doing the INSERT) if that tuple violates the X constraint for S—i.e., if
             t.STATUS  0.

         ●   If we attempt to delete some tuple t, the DBMS need not check the constraint at all, since
             DELETE cannot possibly cause it to be violated.

    2.   Suppliers in London have status 20:
         FORALL t  S ( t.CITY = 'London'  t.STATUS = 20 )

         Here SX is t.CITY = 'London'  t.STATUS = 20 and SY is TRUE. Thus, if we attempt to
         insert the tuple <S8,Finzi,30,London>, the DBMS does not need to perform the actual
         insertion because it can tell ahead of time that it will fail.

    3.   Supplier numbers are unique:
         FORALL t  S ( FORALL u  S ( u.S# = t.S#  u = t ) )




1
  In fact, we could if we liked simply regard the total database constraint DBC as the relvar constraint for each and
every individual relvar; after all, subconstraints within DBC that fail to mention relvar R are simply irrelevant so far as
R is concerned.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             424
Appendixes                                                                              Appendix E / View Updating


         In this example, SX is just TRUE and SY is the whole of SC—and indeed it is intuitively
         obvious that if a tuple is presented for insertion into S, we cannot tell ahead of time whether
         that tuple causes the uniqueness constraint to be violated without examining other tuples, in
         general. Note: Another obvious shorthand would allow the foregoing expression to be
         simplified to just:
         FORALL t,u  S ( u.S# = t.S#  u = t )

         I will make use of this further shorthand from time to time in what follows.

    4.   No supplier with status less than 20 can supply part P6:
         FORALL t  S ( t.STATUS < 20 
             FORALL u  SP ( u.S# = t.S#  u.P# ≠ P#('P6') ) )

         Again SX is just TRUE and SY is the whole of SC;1 but the interesting point about this
         example is that it mentions relvar SP as well as relvar S. The constraint is thus a constraint on
         SP as well, as the following alternative but equivalent formulation makes clear:
         FORALL u  SP ( u.P# = P#('P6') 
             FORALL t  S ( t.S# = u.S#  t.STATUS  20 ) ) )

         Here we can say SPX ≡ TRUE and SPY ≡ SPC.

    5.   Every shipment involves an existing supplier:

         FORALL t  SP ( EXISTS u  S ( u.S# = t.S# ) )


         Again this constraint is a constraint for both S and SP. We have SX ≡ SPX ≡ TRUE, SY ≡
         SPY ≡ SC ≡ SPC. Note that inserting a tuple into S or deleting one from SP cannot possibly
         violate the constraint.

    6.   Let relvar SPJ, with heading {S#,P#,J#}, be subject to the join dependency2
          { SP, PJ, JS }

         where SP denotes the projection of SPJ on attributes S# and P#, and similarly for PJ and JS.
         This join dependency is logically equivalent to the following:
         FORALL x,y,z  SPJ ( x.S# = y.S# & y.P# = z.P# & z.J# = x.J#
                               EXISTS u  SPJ ( u.S# = x.S# & u.P# = y.P# &
                                                 u.J# = z.J# ) )



1
    Though at least we know that an attempt to insert a supplier tuple with STATUS  20 cannot violate the constraint.
2
  See reference [76] for some background to this example. It might help to explain that the intended interpretation (i.e.,
the relvar predicate) for SPJ is: Supplier S# supplies part P# to project J#. The join dependency means, loosely, that if
(a) supplier S# supplies part P# and (b) part P# is supplied to project J# and (c) project J# is supplied by supplier S#,
then (d) supplier S# supplies part P# to project J#.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          425
Appendixes                                                                     Appendix E / View Updating


      We have SPJX ≡ TRUE, SPJY ≡ SPJC. If we attempt to insert or delete some tuple into or
      from relvar SPJ, constraint SPJY will be evaluated after that insertion or deletion has
      (tentatively) taken place.

 7.   There must always be at least one supplier:
      EXISTS t  S ( TRUE )

      Once again we have SX ≡ TRUE, SY ≡ SC. Inserting a tuple cannot violate this constraint, but
      deleting a tuple might.

 8.   All parts are either blue or green and there exists at least one part:
      FORALL t  P ( t.COLOR = 'Blue' OR t.COLOR = 'Green' ) AND
      EXISTS t  P ( TRUE )

      Here PX ≡ t.COLOR = 'Blue' OR t.COLOR = 'Green'; PY ≡ EXISTS t  P (TRUE).

 9.   All parts are either blue or green, or there exists at least one red part:
      FORALL t  P ( t.COLOR = 'Blue' OR t.COLOR = 'Green' ) OR
      EXISTS t  P ( t.COLOR = 'Red' )

      Here PX ≡ TRUE, PY ≡ PC.

      Now I turn my attention to views. Let view R be defined, possibly via several levels of
indirection, in terms of real relvars R1, R2, ..., Rn. Then we can say that view R has a relvar
constraint RC, which we define to be satisfied by R if and only if R1C, R2C, ..., RnC are satisfied by
R1, R2, ..., Rn, respectively. Furthermore, I conjecture that, in general, RC is logically equivalent to
an expression of the form
      ( FORALL t  R ( RX ) ) & ( RY )

(as previously), where RX in turn can easily be defined in terms of R1X, R2X, ..., RnX. By way of
example, let view R be defined as a restriction of relvar A:
      R ≡ A WHERE p

      Recall from Chapter 2 that p here is a quantifier-free predicate. Then RC ≡ (AZ)&(p), and we
define RX ≡ (AX)&(p) and RY ≡ AY. For example, let R ≡ S WHERE STATUS > 20 and let SY be
      FORALL t  S ( FORALL u  S ( u.S# = t.S#  u = t ) )

(“supplier numbers are unique”). Then RC is:
      FORALL t  R ( ( SX ) & ( t.STATUS > 20 ) ) &
      FORALL t  S ( FORALL u  S ( u.S# = t.S#  u = t ) )




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          426
Appendixes                                                                             Appendix E / View Updating


      So we can define RX as (SX) & (t.STATUS > 20) and RY as SY. Note that RY is basically a
constraint on S, not R.
      As another simple example, let R ≡ A RENAME (F AS G). Then RC, RX, and RY are
identical to AC, AX, and AY, respectively, except that all references to F are replaced by references
to G.
      I conclude this section with a refined version of the conceptual update algorithm from the end
of the section “A Model of Updating,” earlier in this appendix. Consider the assignment
         R := r  i - d

where R is a relvar, possibly virtual. The semantics are as follows:

    1.   Every tuple in i must satisfy RX, otherwise the assignment fails.

    2.   Create a temporary real relvar R' with initial value ri-d.

    3.   From R', compute the new values for all real relvars R1, R2, ..., Rn involved in the definition
         of R and assign those values to those relvars, and thereby obtain the new value for R. (Details
         of this step are spelled out, at least implicitly, in subsequent sections.)

    4.   If The Assignment Principle is violated for R, the assignment fails.

    5.   If The Golden Rule is violated for any of R1, R2, ..., Rn, the assignment fails.

    6.   Discard R'.

      Note that RX (a) can be used to check ahead of time that INSERTs are valid and (b) cannot be
violated by DELETEs; RX can be thought of, informally, as “the tuple-level constraint” for R. RY
cannot be checked until after the update has (tentatively) been done; in general, it can be violated by
both INSERTs and DELETEs.


UPDATING RESTRICTIONS

In this section I investigate the question of updating restriction views specifically. I treat
restrictions first because in a sense they are “the easy case,” and also because several later sections
rely on the discussions in this section. I will present the rules first, then show some examples.
       Let R ≡ A WHERE p; then RC, RX, and RY are as given in the previous section (in particular,
RX ≡ (AX)&(p)). Consider the INSERT-type assignment:
         R := R  i

Every tuple in i must satisfy RX. The given assignment expands1 into:
         A := A  i


1
    “Expands” is perhaps not the mot juste in this simple case but becomes so in more complex cases.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                  427
Appendixes                                                                Appendix E / View Updating


After this assignment, R must have the value ri and ai must satisfy AY (where, to remind you, r
and a are the original values of R and A, respectively), otherwise the update is undone.
      Consider now the DELETE-type assignment:
      R := R - d

This assignment expands into:
      A := A - d

After this assignment, R must have the value r-d and a-d must satisfy AY, otherwise the update is
undone.
      By way of example, consider the usual suppliers relvar S, with its usual sample value
(repeated in Fig. E.1 for convenience). Let the constraint SC for suppliers be such that SX is just
TRUE and SY is just “supplier numbers are unique.” Let R ≡ S WHERE STATUS > 20; then RX ≡
TRUE & t.STATUS > 20 (which reduces to just t.STATUS > 20, of course) and RY ≡ SY. Now
consider the following updates on R:
╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                ┌────┬───────┬────────┬────────┐                 ║
║             S │ S# │ SNAME │ STATUS │ CITY    │                 ║
║                ├════┼───────┼────────┼────────┤                 ║
║                │ S1 │ Smith │     20 │ London │                 ║
║                │ S2 │ Jones │     10 │ Paris │                  ║
║                │ S3 │ Blake │     30 │ Paris │                  ║
║                │ S4 │ Clark │     20 │ London │                 ║
║                │ S5 │ Adams │     30 │ Athens │                 ║
║                └────┴───────┴────────┴────────┘                 ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. E.1: The suppliers relvar S—sample value

 1.   INSERT <S6,Lopez,30,Madrid> INTO R: The specified tuple satisfies RX, so it is tentatively
      inserted into S (and therefore appears in R, so The Assignment Principle is satisfied for R).
      After that insertion, SY is satisfied, and so the update succeeds.

 2.   INSERT <S6,Lopez,20,Madrid> INTO R: The specified tuple violates RX, so the update
      fails.

 3.   INSERT <S1,Lopez,30,Madrid> INTO R: The specified tuple satisfies RX, so it is tentatively
      inserted into S (and therefore appears in R, so The Assignment Principle is satisfied for R).
      After that insertion, however, SY is violated, and so the update is undone.

 4.   DELETE <S5,Adams,30,Athens> FROM R: The specified tuple is tentatively deleted from S
      (and therefore no longer appears in R, so The Assignment Principle is satisfied for R). After
      that deletion, SY is satisfied, and so the update succeeds.

      As a basis for certain future examples, I now define a series of additional restriction views
over relvar S:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           428
Appendixes                                                               Appendix E / View Updating


 ■    RI ≡ S WHERE ( STATUS > 20 ) & ( CITY = 'Paris' )

 ■    RU ≡ S WHERE ( STATUS > 20 ) | ( CITY = 'Paris' )

 ■    RD ≡ S WHERE ( STATUS > 20 ) & ( ¬ ( CITY = 'Paris' ) )

 ■    RQ ≡ S WHERE ( STATUS > 20 & ( ¬ ( ( STATUS > 20 ) &
                                       ( ¬ ( CITY = 'Paris' ) ) ) )

      Assume again that SX is just TRUE and SY is just “supplier numbers are unique.” Then, using
p and q to denote the expressions (t.STATUS > 20) and (t.CITY = 'Paris'), respectively, we have X
constraints as follows:
 ■    RIX ≡ p&q

 ■    RUX ≡ p|q

 ■    RDX ≡ p&(¬q)
 ■    RQX ≡ p&(¬(p&(¬q))) ≡ p&q ≡ RIX


UPDATING INTERSECTIONS

In this section and the next two, I consider what is involved in updating intersection, union, and
difference views, respectively. First of all, then, let R ≡ AB (so r = ab); then RC ≡ (AC)&(BC),
and in particular RX ≡ (AX)&(BX). Now consider the INSERT-type assignment:
      R := R  i

Every tuple in i must satisfy RX. The given assignment expands into:
      A := A  i , B := B  i

After these assignments, (a) R must have the value ri and (b) ai must satisfy AY and bi must
satisfy BY, otherwise the update is undone.
       Consider now the DELETE-type assignment:
      R := R - d

This assignment expands into:
      A := A - d , B := B - d

After these assignments, (a) R must have the value r-d and (b) a-d must satisfy AY and b-d must
satisfy BY, otherwise the update is undone. Discussion: The specified assignment means “The
tuples of d are to be deleted from AB”; so every tuple of d must clearly be deleted from at least one
of A and B. However, there is no good reason for deleting from A and not B or vice versa;
moreover, if we did delete from just one, it is likely that deleting d from AB and deleting d from
BA would have different effects. Symmetry therefore strongly suggests that we delete from both.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       429
Appendixes                                                                 Appendix E / View Updating


Moreover, deleting from both has the advantage that the rule is not just symmetric in itself, it is
symmetric with the insert rule also.

Examples

Let real relvars A and B have just one attribute each, of type nonnegative integer, and let their
constraints and initial values be as follows:
      A : AX ≡ n  7 : initial value a = 0 4 5 7
          AY ≡ TRUE

      B : BX ≡ n  2 : initial value b = 3 4 6 7 8
          BY ≡ TRUE

Points arising:

 ■    As the form in which I have stated these constraints and initial values suggests, I talk for
      simplicity as if A and B contained sets of nonnegative integers as such, instead of (as would
      be more correct) tuples containing such integers.

 ■    For clarity I show sets of integers as simple lists with adjacent integers separated by a blank,
      thereby writing, e.g., 0 4 5 7 instead of the more conventional {0,4,5,7}.

 ■    I assume the same initial values for each example.

 ■    The examples all involve attempts to insert or delete sets of integers of cardinality one, and so
      we can speak, loosely, of inserting or deleting individual integers per se.

 ■    I have already explained that, e.g., an INSERT-type assignment is not the same thing as an
      INSERT as such; in the examples in this section, however (also in the next two), I will ensure
      that the preconditions for INSERT and DELETE are always satisfied (barring explicit
      statements to the contrary), and I will therefore feel free to use the more user-friendly terms
      INSERT and DELETE per se in those examples.

      Now consider the following updates on R ≡ AB:
      INSERT 2         INSERT 5        DELETE 7

      Observe that:
 ■    RX ≡ (AX)&(BX) ≡ (n  7) & (n  2).

 ■    2 appears in neither a nor b.

 ■    5 appears in a but not b.

 ■    7 appears in both a and b.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           430
Appendixes                                                                Appendix E / View Updating


     Here now are the results of the three updates. Note: I use the symbol “::” from this point
forward to mean “gives” or “yields” or “produces.”
      INSERT 2 :: A = 0 2 4 5 7
                  B = 2 3 4 6 7 8
      INSERT 5 :: A unchanged
                  B = 3 4 5 6 7 8
      DELETE 7 :: A = 0 4 5
                  B = 3 4 6 8

      For each of these examples, let us also consider what happens if we immediately follow the
specified operation by its inverse:
      INSERT 2 / DELETE 2 :: A and B both unchanged
      INSERT 5 / DELETE 5 :: A = 0 4 7, B unchanged
      DELETE 7 / INSERT 7 :: A and B both unchanged

        As you can see, the sequence INSERT 5 / DELETE 5 fails to preserve the status quo, and the
INSERT and DELETE in question are thus not really inverses after all. I will revisit this issue—
i.e., the question of whether INSERT and DELETE should be inverses—in the section “Some
Remarks on Orthogonality,” later in this appendix.
        Now I return to the usual suppliers relvar S. Let RI be defined as follows:
      RI ≡ ( S WHERE STATUS > 20 )  ( S WHERE CITY = 'Paris' )

Observe that this view is semantically identical to the view of the same name from the previous
section. Its X constraint RIX is
      ( t.STATUS > 20 ) & ( t.CITY = 'Paris' )

which is clearly identical to the constraint of the same name from the previous section. Now
consider the following updates on RI:

 1.   INSERT <S7,Jones,25,Paris> INTO RI: Let i be the relation containing just the specified
      tuple. Then the expansion is
      A := A  i , B := B  i

      where A ≡ S WHERE STATUS > 20 and B ≡ S WHERE CITY = 'Paris', respectively. The
      rules for updating through a restriction thus come into play, and the foregoing expansion
      expands again, into:
      S := S  i , S := S  i

      As explained in Chapter 6, this latter multiple assignment in turn is equivalent to the
      following:
      S := WITH S  i AS S : S  i

      If we think of this expansion as a sequence of assignments




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       431
Appendixes                                                                             Appendix E / View Updating


         S := S  i ;
         S := S  i ;

         then it should be clear that the second has no effect. But that is not the point; rather, the point
         is the collection of the two assignments into one,1 which guarantees that just one assignment
         to S is actually performed. Thus, the net effect is that the new tuple is successfully inserted
         into S, and hence into both A and B, and hence into RI. The Assignment Principle is thus
         satisfied, and so is The Golden Rule.

    2.   INSERT <S6,Lopez,30,Madrid> INTO RI: Here the tuple presented for insertion satisfies the
         constraint AX but not the constraint BX (where A and B are as in the previous example). The
         update therefore fails.

       It should be clear from these examples that, at least as far as INSERTs are concerned, the
intersection view RI exhibits behavior identical to that of the restriction view RI from the section
“Updating Restrictions,” earlier in this appendix. An analogous remark applies to DELETEs also
(exercise for the reader). This state of affairs is highly gratifying, of course, given that the view
definitions are semantically equivalent; indeed, reference [76] asserts it as a principle, or at least an
objective, that “view updatability is a semantic issue, not a syntactic one—i.e., it must not depend
on the particular syntactic form in which the view definition in question happens to be stated.” Part
of my aim in this appendix is to see whether this objective can be achieved.
       Suppose now that A (“suppliers with status greater than 20”) and B (“suppliers in Paris”) are
two distinct real relvars, and we attempt the same two INSERTs on RI ≡ AB. The second
INSERT still fails. The first, however, has the effect of inserting the new tuple into both of those
real relvars, as you will easily see for yourself if you work through the expansions. I will revisit this
example also in the section “Some Remarks on Orthogonality,” later in this appendix.
       I close this section by remarking that (as is well known) intersection is a special case of join.
It follows that the rules for updating intersections must be a special case of those for updating joins,
and so indeed they are. However, I defer detailed discussion of the question of updating joins to a
later section.


UPDATING UNIONS

Let R ≡ AB (so r = ab); then RC ≡ (AC)|(BC), and we can define RX as (AX)|(BX).2 Now
consider the INSERT-type assignment:
         R := R  i




1
 Note, however, that the second assignment in the example violates the preconditions for INSERT. This is one reason
why I need to talk in terms of INSERT- and DELETE-type assignments instead of INSERTs and DELETEs per se.
Other reasons will emerge as we proceed.
2
  Defining RX as (AX)|(BX) guarantees that if RX is not satisfied, then certainly RC is not satisfied—though if RX is
satisfied, it does not follow that RC is satisfied.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                         432
Appendixes                                                                    Appendix E / View Updating


Let ia be the tuples of i that satisfy AX and let ib be the tuples of i that satisfy BX, respectively.
Then the given assignment expands into the double assignment:
      A := A  ia , B := B  ib

After these assignments, (a) R must have the value ri and (b) aia must satisfy AY and bib must
satisfy BY, otherwise the update is undone. Discussion: The given assignment means “The tuples
of i are to be inserted into AB”; so every tuple of i must clearly be inserted into A or B or both.
But how do we decide which ones go where? The intuitively obvious (and symmetric) answer is:
For each tuple t of i, insert t into A if and only if it satisfies AX and into B if and only if it satisfies
BX. Note clearly, however, that the overall operation will still fail if either AY or BY is violated
after those insertions have been done; as usual, therefore, those insertions are only tentative, in a
sense.
       Consider now the DELETE-type assignment:
      R := R - d

This assignment expands into:
      A := A - d , B := B - d

After these assignments, (a) R must have the value r-d and (b) a-d must satisfy AY and b-d must
satisfy BY, otherwise the update is undone.

Examples

First let me return to the “nonnegative integer” relvars A and B from the examples in the previous
section:
        A : AX ≡ n  7 : initial value a = 0 4 5 7
            AY ≡ TRUE

        B : BX ≡ n  2 : initial value b = 3 4 6 7 8
            BY ≡ TRUE

Now consider the following updates on R ≡ AB:
      INSERT 1          INSERT 2         DELETE 0          DELETE 3          DELETE 4

Observe that:
 ■      RX ≡ (AX)|(BX) ≡ (n  7) | (n  2).

 ■      1 appears in neither a nor b and satisfies AX but not BX.

 ■      2 appears in neither a nor b and satisfies both AX and BX.

 ■      0 appears in a but not b.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              433
Appendixes                                                              Appendix E / View Updating


 ■     3 appears in b but not a.

 ■     4 appears in both a and b.

      Here now are the results of the five updates:
      INSERT 1 :: A = 0 1 4 5 7
                  B unchanged
      INSERT 2 :: A = 0 2 4 5 7
                  B = 2 3 4 6 7 8
      DELETE 0 :: A = 4 5 7
                  B unchanged
      DELETE 3 :: A unchanged
                  B = 4 6 7 8
      DELETE 4 :: A = 0 5 7
                  B = 3 6 7 8

      Let us also consider in each case what happens if we immediately follow the specified
operation by its inverse:
      INSERT 1 / DELETE 1 :: A and B both unchanged
      INSERT 2 / DELETE 2 :: A and B both unchanged
      DELETE 0 / INSERT 0 :: A and B both unchanged
      DELETE 3 / INSERT 3 :: B unchanged, A = 0 3 4 5 7
      DELETE 4 / INSERT 4 :: A and B both unchanged

     As you can see, the only sequence that fails to preserve the status quo is DELETE 3 / INSERT
3. Again, I will revisit this issue in the section “Some Remarks on Orthogonality.”
     Now let us switch to the suppliers example. Let RU be defined as follows:
      RU ≡ ( S WHERE STATUS > 20 )  ( S WHERE CITY = 'Paris' )

Observe that this view is semantically identical to the view of the same name from the section
“Updating Restrictions.” Its X constraint RUX is
      ( t.STATUS > 20 ) | ( t.CITY = 'Paris' )

which is clearly identical to the constraint of the same name from the section “Updating
Restrictions.” I leave it as an exercise to show that view RU exhibits the same behavior with
respect to INSERTs and DELETEs, regardless of which way it is defined.


UPDATING DIFFERENCES

Let R ≡ A-B (so r = a-b); then RC ≡ (AC) & (FORALL t  R (t / B)), and we can define RX as
simply AX. Consider the INSERT-type assignment:
      R := R  i

Every tuple in i must satisfy RX. The given assignment expands into:
      A := A  i




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      434
Appendixes                                                              Appendix E / View Updating


After this assignment, (a) R must have the value ri and (b) ai must satisfy AY, otherwise the
update is undone.
      Consider now the DELETE-type assignment:
      R := R - d

This assignment expands into:
      A := A - d

After this assignment, (a) R must have the value r-d and (b) a-d must satisfy AY, otherwise the
update is undone. Exercise: What happens if we try to delete a tuple from (or insert a tuple into)
the view R ≡ A-A?

Examples

Again I return to the “nonnegative integer” relvars A and B:
       A : AX ≡ n  7 : initial value a = 0 4 5 7
           AY ≡ TRUE

       B : BX ≡ n  2 : initial value b = 3 4 6 7 8
           BY ≡ TRUE

      Consider the following updates on R ≡ A-B:
      INSERT 1        DELETE 0

      I leave it to you to figure out why I choose exactly these examples; however, I note that RX ≡
n  7. Results:
      INSERT 1 :: A = 0 1 4 5 7
                  B unchanged
      DELETE 0 :: A = 4 5 7
                  B unchanged

      Let us also consider in each case what happens if we immediately follow the specified
operation by its inverse:
      INSERT 1 / DELETE 1 :: A and B both unchanged
      DELETE 0 / INSERT 0 :: A and B both unchanged

      Now consider the suppliers example once again. Let RD be defined as follows:
      RD ≡ ( S WHERE STATUS > 20 ) - ( S WHERE CITY = 'Paris' )

Observe that this view is semantically identical to the view of the same name from the section
“Updating Restrictions.” Its X constraint RDX is
      t.STATUS > 20




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       435
Appendixes                                                                               Appendix E / View Updating


which is not identical to the constraint of the same name from the section “Updating Restrictions.”
It is nevertheless still the case that view RD exhibits the same behavior with respect to INSERTs
and DELETEs, regardless of which way it is defined (another exercise for the reader).
       I close this section by remarking that difference is in fact a special case of semidifference (to
use Tutorial D syntax, A SEMIMINUS B—equivalently, A NOT MATCHING B—reduces to A
MINUS B if A and B are of the same type).1 It follows that the rules for updating differences must
be a special case of those for updating semidifferences, and so they are. For purposes of reference,
let me explicitly state the rules for semidifference here. Let R ≡ A NOT MATCHING B (so r = a
NOT MATCHING b). Then RC is:
         FORALL t  R ( ( AX ) & ¬ ( EXISTS u ( BX ( u  t ) ) ) ) & ( AY )

where u is a tuple whose heading consists of the attributes of B that are not also attributes of A; I use
the notation BX(ut) to stress the point that it is the (tuple) union of u and t that is required to satisfy
BX. Thus, RX ≡ AX. Consider the INSERT-type assignment:
         R := R  i

Every tuple in i must satisfy RX. The given assignment expands into:
         A := A  i

After this assignment, (a) R must have the value ri and (b) ai must satisfy AY, otherwise the
update is undone.
      Consider now the DELETE-type assignment:
         R := R - d

This assignment expands into:
         A := A - d

After this assignment, (a) R must have the value r-d and (b) a-d must satisfy AY, otherwise the
update is undone.
      By way of example, let R ≡ S NOT MATCHING SP, and let relvars S and SP have their usual
sample values and be subject to the usual constraints (in particular, the usual key and foreign key
constraints). Then:
 1. INSERT <S7,Jones,25,Paris> INTO R: Succeeds.

    2.   INSERT <S1,Lopez,30,Madrid> INTO R: Fails on a violation of constraint SY (supplier
         number not unique).

    3.   DELETE <S5,Adams,30,Athens> FROM R: Succeeds.



1
 By contrast, join is not a special case of semijoin—in fact, the opposite is at least partly true. To be specific, A
SEMIJOIN B (equivalently, A MATCHING B) reduces to A JOIN B if the heading of B is a subset of that of A.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             436
Appendixes                                                                Appendix E / View Updating


 4.   DELETE <S4,Clark,20,London> FROM R: Fails on a violation of constraint SY (referential
      integrity violation).


NESTED UPDATES

Before going on to consider the rules for updating through other relational operators, I need to
elaborate somewhat on the issue of nested updates (e.g., updating R ≡ AB where A and B are not
just simple relvar references but more general relational expressions). Of course, I did touch on this
issue in the last three sections when I discussed the views RI, RU, and RD, all of which were
defined (in one of their incarnations) in terms of restrictions; however, now I can take a closer look.
       Once again I use “nonnegative integer” relvars as a basis for my examples. Assume we have
three such relvars A, B, and C, with constraints AC, BC, CC all just TRUE, for simplicity, and initial
values as follows:
      A : initial value a = 0 4 5 7 10
      B : initial value b = 3 4 6 7 8 11
      C : initial value c = 0 1 2 7 8 9 12

      Again I assume the same initial values for each example, barring explicit statements to the
contrary. I also assume the set of integers we want to insert is i = 1 2 3 9 (again, the same for each
example; for reasons I will get to in a little while, the examples all involve INSERT-type
assignments specifically).

Example 1

Let R ≡ A(BC), and consider the INSERT-type assignment R := Ri. We can represent this
operation by means of the following tree structure. Note: I have taken a slight syntactic liberty in
that tree by including assignments at some of the nodes in which the target is not a simple variable
reference but, rather, a more general operational expression—a pseudovariable reference, in fact.
(As noted in Chapter 5, Tutorial D does not currently support such pseudovariables.)
                      0. A(BC) := A  (BC)  i
                                   │
                          ┌——─────┴——──────┐
                          │                  │
                1. A := A  i            2. BC := (BC)  i
                   A := a' say              BC := x say
                                     ┌───────┴───────┐
                                     │               │
                            3. B := B  i         4. C := C  i
                               B := b' say           C := c' say

      Explanation: The root of the tree (Node 0) represents the original update. We apply the rule
for updating through union to obtain updates to A and BC, respectively (Nodes 1 and 2); a' and x
are the values denoted by the assignment sources at Nodes 1 and 2, respectively. Observe that a'
and x are immediately computable from a, b, c, and i. Next, we apply the rule for updating through
intersection to obtain updates to B and C, respectively (Nodes 3 and 4); b' and c' are the values
denoted by the assignment sources at Nodes 3 and 4, respectively. Observe that b' and c' are




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        437
Appendixes                                                                             Appendix E / View Updating


immediately computable from b, c, and i (x is not directly needed; effectively, x is just the value of
some temporary variable that is used internally during the execution of the overall update but is
never exposed to the user).
      Given the specified values for a, b, c, and i, we obtain:
        a' = ai = 0 1 2 3 4 5 7 9 10
        b' = bi = 1 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 11
        c' = ci = 0 1 2 3 7 8 9 12

        We also have:
        x   = (bc)i = 1 2 3 7 8 9 = b'c'

        Observe that:

    ■   The initial value of A(BC) = a(bc) = 0 4 5 7 8 10 and the final value = a'(b'c') = 0 1 2
        3 4 5 7 8 9 10, and the overall update thus satisfies The Assignment Principle.

    ■   Nodes 3 and 4 considered together also satisfy The Assignment Principle, because b'c' = x.
        So do Nodes 1 and 2, of course, as we effectively saw in the previous bullet item.

    ■   Nodes 3 and 4 both involve an assignment of the form R := Ri in which i and r are not
        disjoint (and the assignment is thus not a valid INSERT, though it is “INSERT-type”).

       Now, immediately following the INSERT-type assignment of the foregoing example by the
DELETE-type assignment R := R-i does not preserve the status quo (though it does work
satisfactorily in other respects); yet again, I refer you to the section “Some Remarks on
Orthogonality” for further discussion. Apart from such considerations, it should be intuitively clear
from this example that updates via an arbitrarily complex relational expression will certainly work1
if both of the following conditions are satisfied:

    ■   Condition 1: The expression involves intersections and unions only—because INSERT-type
        assignments via such an expression ultimately expand to an INSERT-type assignment on
        every real relvar involved and DELETE-type assignments via such an expression ultimately
        expand to a DELETE-type assignment on every real relvar involved. (This is why I do not
        bother to show any examples in this section involving DELETE-type assignments.)
    ■   Condition 2: The expansion does not involve two or more assignments to the same real
        relvar.

      Examples 2-6 therefore examine the question of what happens if these conditions are violated.
To be specific, Examples 2 and 6 consider the effect of violating Condition 1 only; Example 3
considers the effect of violating Condition 2 only; and Examples 4 and 5 consider the effect of
violating both.


1
  The term work here (and in similar contexts elsewhere) is intended to include the case in which the update fails on a
violation of either The Assignment Principle or The Golden Rule.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                         438
Appendixes                                                                 Appendix E / View Updating


Example 2

Let R ≡ A(B-C), and consider R := Ri. Here is the tree:
                    0. A(B-C) := A(B-C)  i
                                │
                        ┌───────┴───────┐
                        │               │
                1. A := A  i      2. B-C := (B-C)  i
                   A := a' say        B-C := x say
                                        │
                                        │
                                   3. B := B  i
                                      B := b' say

      Now, no integer in B-C can appear in C, by definition. Given the specified values for c and i,
therefore, the foregoing update will necessarily fail on a violation of The Assignment Principle—so
let me change the initial value c to just 0 12. Then we obtain:
      a' = ai    = 0 1 2 3 4 5 7 9 10
      b' = bi    = 1 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 11
      c' = c      = 0 12 (C is not updated at all)
      x = (b-c)i = 1 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 11 = b'-c'

      Observe that the initial value of A(B-C) = a(b-c) = 4 7 and the final value = a'(b'-c') = 1 2
3 4 7 9, and the update thus satisfies The Assignment Principle.
      Without going into further details, it should be intuitively clear that updates via an expression
involving any combination of intersections, unions, and differences will work satisfactorily so long
as Condition 2 is satisfied. So what happens if we violate Condition 2?

Example 3

Let R ≡ A(AB), and consider R := Ri (this example is effectively the same as Example 1, except
that I have replaced C by A). Here is the tree:
                            0. A(AB) := A(AB)  i
                                        │
                                  ┌─────┴─────┐
                                  │            │
                        1. A := A  i     2. AB := (AB)  i
                           A := a' say       AB := x say
                                       ┌──────┴───────┐
                                       │               │
                               3. A := A  i        4. B := B  i
                                  A := a'' say         B := b' say

       The significant thing about this tree is that it includes two distinct assignments (at Nodes 1
and 3) to the same target A; in other words, Condition 2 has been violated. As a consequence, it
might seem that the order in which individual assignments are performed could affect the overall
result. Let us take a closer look.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         439
Appendixes                                                               Appendix E / View Updating


      It should be clear that, although trees are (of course) constructed from the top down, they need
to be processed from the bottom up. Thus, the tree in the example can be regarded as representing
the following multiple assignment:
      A := A  i , B := B  i , A := A  i

(corresponding to Nodes 3, 4, and 1, in that order). The two assignments to A are then collected
together, yielding:
      B := B  i , A := WITH A  i AS A : A  i

Evaluating, we obtain:
      b' = bi    = 1 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 11
      a' = ai    = 0 1 2 3 4 5 7 9 10 = a''
      x = (ab)i = 1 2 3 4 7 9 = a'b'

      Once again, then, the overall update works (the final value of R is 0 1 2 3 4 5 7 9 10 =
a'(a'b')). But the example is weak, in a way, precisely because a'' = a' (the order in which we
execute the assignments to A thus clearly makes no difference in this particular example). Now, the
reason why a'' = a' is that the constraints AC and BC are both just TRUE. Even if this were not the
case, however, it would still be the case that the order in which we execute those assignments to A
would make no difference to the overall result. Why? Because (as we have already seen) those
assignments will be either all INSERT-type assignments or all DELETE-type assignments, not a
mixture, and the assignments
      A := WITH A  j AS A : A  k

and
      A := WITH A  k AS A : A  j

are logically equivalent, as are the assignments
      A := WITH A - j AS A : A - k

and
      A := WITH A - k AS A : A - j

      The foregoing example raises another issue, however. As we have seen, the example involves
assignment of a new value b' to relvar B. But why does it? Given that A(AB) is identically
equal to A, why does B get updated at all? Why is updating A(AB) not equivalent to updating
just A? I will return to this question in the section “Some Remarks on Orthogonality”; for now, I
simply note that this example does appear to violate the principle, articulated earlier, that view
updating is or should be a matter of semantics, not syntax.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        440
Appendixes                                                               Appendix E / View Updating


Example 4

Let R ≡ A-(A-A), and consider R := Ri. The tree in this case is very simple:
                      0. A-(A-A) := A-(A-A)  i
                                 │
                                 │
                                 │
                           1. A := A  i
                              A := a' say

Further discussion seems superfluous.

Example 5

Let R ≡ (AB)-(AB), and consider R := Ri. Here is the tree:
                        0. (AB)-(AB) := (AB)-(AB)  i
                                       │
                                       │
                                       │
                                1. AB := (AB)  i
                                   AB := x say
                              ┌────────┴────────┐
                              │                 │
                      2. A := A  i          3. B := B  i
                         A := a' say            B := b' say

       This update necessarily fails, because (thanks to the semantics of “-”) no integer appearing in
(AB)-(AB) is allowed to appear in AB, a state of affairs that is logically impossible unless ab =
i = ø. (In fact, (AB)-(AB) is equivalent to (A-B)(B-A)—the “symmetric difference” of A and
B—and it is intuitively obvious that inserting anything into the view is impossible.)

Example 6

For the final example in this section, I return to suppliers once again. Let RQ be defined as follows:
       RQ ≡ ( S WHERE STATUS > 20 ) -
            ( ( S WHERE STATUS > 20 ) - ( S WHERE CITY = 'Paris' ) )

Observe that this view is semantically identical to the view of the same name from the section
“Updating Restrictions.” Its X constraint RQX is
      t.STATUS > 20

which is not identical to the constraint of the same name from the section “Updating Restrictions.”
It is nevertheless still the case that view RQ exhibits the same behavior with respect to INSERTs
and DELETEs, regardless of which way it is defined (another exercise for the reader).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       441
Appendixes                                                                 Appendix E / View Updating


UPDATING EXTENSIONS

I now turn my attention to some of the other relational operators. This section deals with EXTEND;
the next two deal with joins and projections, respectively.
      Let R ≡ EXTEND A ADD (z AS Z); then RC ≡ (AC) & (FORALL t  R (t.Z = z)), and we can
define RX as
        ( AX(u) ) & ( t.Z = z )

      Here u ≡ t{ALL BUT Z}; I use the notation AX(u) to stress the point that it is u, not t, that is
required to satisfy AX. Now consider the INSERT-type assignment:
        R := R  i

Every tuple in i must satisfy RX. The given assignment expands into:
        A := A  ( i { ALL BUT Z } )

After this assignment, (a) R must have the value ri and (b) the new value of A must satisfy AY,
otherwise the update is undone.
      Consider now the DELETE-type assignment:
        R := R - d

This assignment expands into:
        A := A - ( d { ALL BUT Z } )

After this assignment, (a) R must have the value r-d and (b) the new value of A must satisfy AY,
otherwise the update is undone.
       Note: Every EXTEND invocation is equivalent to a certain join invocation, and the update
rules just outlined are consistent with this fact.
       By way of example, let R be defined thus:
        R ≡ EXTEND P ADD ( WEIGHT * 454 AS GMWT )

Then:

 1.     INSERT <P7,Cog,Red,12,Paris,5448.0> INTO R: Succeeds (the projection of this tuple over
        all but GMWT is inserted into P).

 2.     INSERT <P7,Cog,Red,12,Paris,5449.0> INTO R: Fails.

 3.     DELETE <P1,Nut,Red,12,London,5448.0> FROM R: Succeeds (the tuple for part P1 is
        deleted from P).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         442
Appendixes                                                                   Appendix E / View Updating


UPDATING JOINS

To what extent join views might or might not be updatable has been the subject of controversy for
many years. Partly for that reason, I proceed a little differently in this section—instead of simply
stating a set of rules and then showing examples to illustrate them, I want to consider a series of
examples first and use those examples as a basis from which to extrapolate a suitable set of rules.
The examples are all based on the usual suppliers-and-parts database (with its usual constraints) and
the usual sample values (see Fig. E.2).
╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║    ┌────┬───────┬────────┬────────┐           ┌────┬────┬─────┐ ║
║ S │ S# │ SNAME │ STATUS │ CITY    │       SP │ S# │ P# │ QTY │ ║
║    ├════┼───────┼────────┼────────┤           ├════┼════┼─────┤ ║
║    │ S1 │ Smith │     20 │ London │           │ S1 │ P1 │ 300 │ ║
║    │ S2 │ Jones │     10 │ Paris │            │ S1 │ P2 │ 200 │ ║
║    │ S3 │ Blake │     30 │ Paris │            │ S1 │ P3 │ 400 │ ║
║    │ S4 │ Clark │     20 │ London │           │ S1 │ P4 │ 200 │ ║
║    │ S5 │ Adams │     30 │ Athens │           │ S1 │ P5 │ 100 │ ║
║    └────┴───────┴────────┴────────┘           │ S1 │ P6 │ 100 │ ║
║                                               │ S2 │ P1 │ 300 │ ║
║    ┌────┬───────┬───────┬────────┬────────┐   │ S2 │ P2 │ 400 │ ║
║ P │ P# │ PNAME │ COLOR │ WEIGHT │ CITY    │   │ S3 │ P2 │ 200 │ ║
║    ├════┼───────┼───────┼────────┼────────┤   │ S4 │ P2 │ 200 │ ║
║    │ P1 │ Nut   │ Red   │   12.0 │ London │   │ S4 │ P4 │ 300 │ ║
║    │ P2 │ Bolt │ Green │    17.0 │ Paris │    │ S4 │ P5 │ 400 │ ║
║    │ P3 │ Screw │ Blue │    17.0 │ Oslo   │   └────┴────┴─────┘ ║
║    │ P4 │ Screw │ Red   │   14.0 │ London │                     ║
║    │ P5 │ Cam   │ Blue │    12.0 │ Paris │                      ║
║    │ P6 │ Cog   │ Red   │   19.0 │ London │                     ║
║    └────┴───────┴───────┴────────┴────────┘                     ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. E.2: The suppliers-and-parts database—sample values

      First of all, let R ≡ A JOIN B (so r = a JOIN b); then RC ≡ (AC)&(BC), and in particular RX
is:
      ( AX(a) ) & ( BX(b) )

       Here a and b are the projections of t on the attributes of A and B, respectively (t being the
tuple that is supposed to satisfy RX, of course); I use the notation AX(a) to stress the point that it is
a, not t, that is required to satisfy AX, and similarly for BX(b). Note: If A and B are of the same
type, A JOIN B degenerates to A INTERSECT B, and the constraint degenerates to that for
intersection; if A and B have no common attribute names, A JOIN B degenerates to the cartesian
product of A and B, and the constraint degenerates to that for cartesian product.
       The usual requirements regarding The Assignment Principle and The Golden Rule apply. I
omit further details (or most of them, at any rate) in the discussions that follow.

Example 1

For my first example, I consider suppliers only. In Fig. E.2, suppliers are represented by a single
real relvar that looks like this:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            443
Appendixes                                                                            Appendix E / View Updating


       S { S#, STATUS, CITY }

(I ignore supplier names for simplicity.) Thus, we might define projection views as follows:
       ST ≡ S { S#, STATUS
       SC ≡ S { S#, CITY }

      In accordance with The Principle of Interchangeability, however, we could come up with a
different design in which ST and SC are real and S is a join view, thus:
       S ≡ ST JOIN SC

      This join is key to key and therefore one to one. Moreover, every S# value appearing in ST
also appears in SC and vice versa—i.e., this constraint is effectively part of the relvar constraint for
each of S and ST and SC (and S in particular is not in sixth normal form, 6NF,1 regardless of
whether it is real or virtual)—for otherwise the two designs would not be equivalent.

       For this revised design, it is obvious that
       INSERT i INTO S

expands into
       INSERT i { S#, STATUS } INTO ST
       INSERT i { S#, CITY }   INTO SC

and
       DELETE d FROM S

expands into
       DELETE d { S#, STATUS } FROM ST
       DELETE d { S#, CITY }   FROM SC

      As this first example suggests, therefore, updating a one-to-one join is straightforward. Also,
I noted earlier that intersection is a special case of join; more precisely, it is a special case of one-to-
one join specifically, and the update rules just outlined are consistent with this fact.
      Note: For clarity, I abbreviate the terms “INSERT-type assignment” and “DELETE-type
assignment,” both in this section and the next, to just INSERT and DELETE, respectively (and I
show expansions in terms of INSERT and DELETE specifically). These simplifications are
legitimate, for the most part, because I will usually make no attempt either to insert a tuple that is
already present or to delete one that is not. When the expansions do violate either of these
preconditions, I will note the fact explicitly. Observe in particular that the expansions shown in
connection with the foregoing example do not violate them.

1
  Loosely, a relvar is in 6NF if and only if it cannot be nonloss decomposed into two or more projections. See
reference [76] for an explanation of nonloss decomposition and a tutorial on all the normal forms mentioned in this
appendix.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           444
Appendixes                                                                Appendix E / View Updating


      Now let me revise the foregoing example slightly. To be specific, suppose some suppliers
have a status but no city and vice versa (in other words, ST and SC are real relvars and some
suppliers are represented in just one of the two). Then deleting a tuple from ST JOIN SC could be
implemented by deleting a tuple from just one of ST and SC without violating either The
Assignment Principle or The Golden Rule. But deleting from both has the advantage of
symmetry—see the discussion of updating intersections, earlier in this appendix—as well as the
advantage that we have just one rule, universally applied. Of course, we can avoid deleting from
both, if we want to, by not deleting from S in the first place: in particular, by not giving the user
DELETE rights over that view.

Example 2

For my next example, I consider both suppliers and parts. In Fig. E.2, suppliers and parts are
represented by two real relvars that look like this:
      S { S#, CITY }
      P { P#, CITY }

(I ignore other attributes for simplicity.) Thus, we might define a join view as follows:
      SCP ≡ S JOIN P

      In accordance with The Principle of Interchangeability, however, we could come up with a
different design in which SCP is real and S and P are projection views, thus:
      S ≡ SCP { S#, CITY
      P ≡ SCP { P#, CITY }

       Again we have SCP ≡ S JOIN P, of course—and the join is many to many, regardless of
whether SCP is real or virtual. What is more, if tuples <s,c,p> and <s',c,p'> appear in SCP, then
tuples <s',c,p> and <s,c,p'> must appear in SCP also—i.e., this constraint is effectively part of the
relvar constraint for each of S and P and SCP (and SCP in particular is not in fourth normal form,
4NF, regardless of whether it is real or virtual)—for otherwise the designs would not be equivalent.
It follows that even if SCP is real, the updates
      INSERT <S9,London,P8> INTO SCP

and
      DELETE <S1,London,P1> FROM SCP

both fail, because they violate that constraint. The following INSERT, by contrast, succeeds—
      INSERT i INTO SCP

—if i contains exactly the tuples




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        445
Appendixes                                                                  Appendix E / View Updating


       <S9,London,P1>      <S9,London,P8>
       <S9,London,P4>      <S1,London,P8>
       <S9,London,P6>      <S4,London,P8>

    Observe in particular that this INSERT has the effect of inserting <S9,London> into S ≡
SCP{S#,CITY} and <P8,London> into P ≡ SCP{P#,CITY}.
    In similar fashion, the following DELETE also succeeds—
       DELETE d FROM SCP

—if d contains exactly the tuples
       <S1,London,P1>      <S4,London,P1>
       <S1,London,P4>      <S4,London,P4>
       <S1,London,P6>      <S4,London,P6>

    This DELETE has the effect of deleting <S1,London> and <S4,London> from S ≡
SCP{S#,CITY} and <P1,London>, <P4,London>, and <P6,London> from P ≡ SCP{P#,CITY}.
    So if SCP is in fact a join view, it should be clear that
       INSERT i INTO SCP

expands into
       INSERT i { S#, CITY } INTO S ,
       INSERT i { P#, CITY } INTO P

and
       DELETE d FROM SCP

into
       DELETE d { S#, CITY } FROM S

       DELETE d { P#, CITY } FROM P

       As this example suggests, updating a many-to-many join is also straightforward; in fact, the
expansions are the same as for the one-to-one case, though specific INSERTs and DELETEs are
more likely to fail in the many-to-many case on violations of The Golden Rule. Also, I noted
earlier that cartesian product is a special case of join; more precisely, it is a special case of many-to-
many join specifically, and the update rules just outlined are consistent with this fact—in other
words, they apply directly to updating cartesian products.

Example 3

For my last example, I consider suppliers and shipments. In Fig. E.2, suppliers and shipments are
represented by two real relvars that look like this:
       S { S#, CITY
       SP { S#, P#, QTY }




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           446
Appendixes                                                                            Appendix E / View Updating


(I ignore other attributes for simplicity.) Thus, we might define a join view as follows:
        SSP ≡ S JOIN SP

      In accordance with The Principle of Interchangeability, however, we could come up with a
different design in which SSP is real and S and SP are projection views, thus:
        S ≡ SSP { S#, CITY
        SP ≡ SSP { S#, P#, QTY }

       Again we have SSP ≡ S JOIN SP, of course—and the join is a key-to-matching-foreign-key
    1
join and therefore one to many, regardless of whether SSP is real or virtual. What is more, if tuples
<s,c,p,q> and <s,c',p',q'> both appear in SSP, then c = c'—i.e., this constraint is effectively part of
the relvar constraint for each of S and SP and SSP (and SSP in particular is not in third normal
form, 3NF, regardless of whether it is real or virtual)—for otherwise the designs would not be
equivalent. It follows that even if SSP is real, the update
        INSERT <S4,Athens,P1,100> INTO SSP

fails, because it violates that constraint. The following updates, by contrast, both succeed:
        INSERT <S4,London,P1,100> INTO SSP

        INSERT <S9,London,P1,100> INTO SSP

       The first has the effect of inserting <S4,P1,100> into SP ≡ SSP{S#,P#,QTY} (only, because
the tuple <S4,London> is already present in S ≡ SSP{S#,CITY}); the second has the effect of
inserting <S9,London> into S ≡ SSP{S#,CITY} and <S9,P1,100> into SP ≡ SSP{S#,P#,QTY}.
       So if SSP is in fact a join view, it should be clear that
        INSERT i INTO SSP

expands into
        INSERT i { S#, CITY }               INTO S

        INSERT i { S#, P#, QTY } INTO SP

(though the “INSERT” into S, at least, is really an “INSERT-type assignment,” since it might be
“inserting” some tuples that already exist). This expansion is as for the one-to-one and many-to-
many cases.
      What about DELETE? On the face of it, there seems to be a problem here. The “obvious”
expansion for
        DELETE d FROM SSP



1
  Even if S and SP are both views!—that is, the fact that every S# value appearing in view SP also appears in view S
constitutes a foreign key constraint from one view to another.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       447
Appendixes                                                                Appendix E / View Updating


is
      DELETE d { S#, CITY } FROM S , DELETE d { S#, P#, QTY } FROM SP

     This expansion is as for the one-to-one and many-to-many cases and is symmetric with the
expansion for INSERT. But consider the following example:
      DELETE <S1,London,P1,300> FROM SSP

      If SSP is a real relvar, this DELETE succeeds; but if it is a join view, it fails (given the
foregoing expansion) on a referential integrity violation, because it leaves some tuples for supplier
S1 in SP but no such tuple in S, and we have therefore violated both The Golden Rule and The
Principle of Interchangeability. Note: Reference [76] would allow triggered actions such as
cascade delete to occur at this point, the effect of which is not to violate The Golden Rule after all
but to violate The Assignment Principle instead. I do not pursue this possibility here for obvious
reasons.
      Precisely because of the state of affairs just explained, many writers have suggested that
DELETE on a one-to-many join view should delete from the “many” side only—that is, the
expansion for
      DELETE d FROM SSP

should be just
      DELETE d { S#, P#, QTY } FROM SP

      This approach means the example previously discussed—
      DELETE <S1,London,P1,300> FROM SSP

—has the effect of deleting <S1,P1,300> from SP (only); thus, the DELETE succeeds, and The
Principle of Interchangeability, The Assignment Principle, and The Golden Rule are all preserved.
However, the approach has its disadvantages too:

 ■     The INSERT and DELETE rules are asymmetric.

 ■     INSERT and DELETE are not necessarily inverse operations.

 ■    The DELETE rule (unlike the INSERT rule) for one-to-many joins is different from that for
      one-to-one and many-to-many joins.

       On the third hand ... To continue to talk in terms of the SSP example specifically for
definiteness, the INSERT rule can be characterized, informally, as “insert S tuples if they do not
exist, plus insert matching SP tuples.” Thus, we might consider extending the DELETE rule
accordingly, along the lines of “delete SP tuples if they exist, plus delete S tuples if they now have
no matching SP tuples.” We might even make the argument that the DELETE rule in the one-to-
one and many-to-many cases behaves in essentially the same way, implying that this revised




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         448
Appendixes                                                                                Appendix E / View Updating


approach overcomes all three of the objections identified above. In fact, I do make this
argument!—that is, I do argue that the DELETE rule is really the same in all three cases. My
argument is based on an appeal to first principles1 (see the section “A Model of Updating” earlier in
this appendix). To be specific, the semantics of the update
         DELETE <S1,London,P1,300> FROM SSP

are given by the following algorithm:

    1.   Materialize SSP; call the result T.

    2.   DELETE <S1,London,P1,300> FROM T.

    3.   S := S - SSP { S#, CITY }       T { S#, CITY },
         SP := SP - SSP { S#, P#, QTY }  T { S#, P#, QTY }.

    4.   Check The Assignment Principle for SSP ≡ S JOIN SP.

    5.   Check The Golden Rule for S and SP (though the particular constraint that every S# value
         appearing in SP also appears in S will necessarily be satisfied).

    6.   Discard T.

      Note that the foregoing algorithm works even if SSP is real (except that in that case we would
need to check The Golden Rule for SSP instead of S and SP). And if SSP is a view, the algorithm
has the effect of deleting the specified tuple from SP and, if and only if that tuple is the sole tuple
for supplier S1 in SSP, deleting the tuple for supplier S1 from S as well.


UPDATING PROJECTIONS

The structure of this section resembles, somewhat, that of the previous section on updating joins:
Again I proceed by considering a series of examples and extrapolating a suitable set of rules from
them.
      First of all, let R ≡ A{ALL BUT Z} (so r = a{ALL BUT Z}); then RC is:
         FORALL t  R ( EXISTS u ( ( t = u { ALL BUT Z } ) & ( AC ( u ) ) ) )

      We can define RX as follows. Recall first that X constraints are quantifier free; without loss
of generality, therefore, we can assume that AX is in conjunctive normal form. Now replace every
conjunct in AX that mentions Z by TRUE. What results is RX.
      In the previous section, I showed three examples. In this section, I show essentially the same
three examples, but I look at them from the opposite point of view, as it were—i.e., I assume the
joins are real relvars and the projections are views. Note in particular, therefore, that the projections


1
    Of course, all previous discussions were based on those principles as well, but implicitly so.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     449
Appendixes                                                                 Appendix E / View Updating


I will be discussing in connection with those three examples are all the result of some nonloss
decomposition.
       The usual requirements regarding The Assignment Principle and The Golden Rule apply; I
omit the details (mostly) in the discussions that follow.

Example 1

Let S{S#,STATUS,CITY} be a real relvar. Define projection views ST and SC thus:
      ST ≡ S { S#, STATUS }
      SC ≡ S { S#, CITY }

      These views satisfy the constraint that every S# value appearing in ST also appears in SC and
vice versa; following The Principle of Interchangeability, therefore, the same would have to be true
if ST and SC were real relvars and S was a join view. This fact strongly suggests that ST and SC
will often have to be updated “simultaneously,” via some user-visible multiple assignment (by
which I mean the multiple assignment in question must be explicitly specified as such by the user).
For example, if ST and SC were real relvars, the following would clearly be a valid update:
      INSERT <S9,20> INTO ST , INSERT <S9,London> INTO SC

     It follows that the same must be true if ST and SC are views. In order to explain the
semantics of this update in the view case, I again appeal to first principles. Here is the algorithm:

 1.   Materialize ST and SC; call the results ST' and SC', respectively.

 2.   INSERT <S9,20> INTO ST', INSERT <S9,London> INTO SC'.

 3.   S := ST' JOIN SC'.

 4.   Check The Assignment Principle for ST ≡ S{S#,STATUS} and SC ≡ S{S#,CITY}.

 5.   Check The Golden Rule for S.

 6.   Discard ST' and SC'.

       The foregoing algorithm also works if ST and SC are real, not views (except that in that case
we would need to check The Golden Rule for ST and SC instead of S).
       Of course, to repeat a point from the section “A Model of Updating,” there is no requirement
that the foregoing sequence of steps actually be executed in order to achieve the desired result. To
be more specific, we have seen that, e.g., inserting the tuple <S9,20> into ST requires a
complementary tuple <S9,c> to be inserted into SC for some CITY value c; but there is nothing to
prevent the DBMS from treating some specified CITY value c as a default and performing that
complementary INSERT automatically. In other words, I have no objection to the possibility of
building some kind of default scheme—so long as it is systematic—on top of what I am proposing
here. What I do not want to do, however, is to make any such scheme an integral part of my




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         450
Appendixes                                                                                Appendix E / View Updating


proposal, because existing default schemes, at least, are notoriously ad hoc and suffer from
numerous well-known problems. I ignore defaults for the rest of this appendix.1
     Now consider the following “simpler” INSERT example:
         INSERT <S9,20> INTO ST

      Here is the conceptual algorithm (with apologies for the mixture of tuple- and relation-level
notation in Step 2):

    1.   Materialize ST and SC; call the results ST' and SC', respectively.

    2.   INSERT <S9,20> INTO ST', INSERT ø INTO SC'.

    3.   S := ST' JOIN SC'.

    4.   Check The Assignment Principle for ST ≡ S{S#,STATUS} and SC ≡ S{S#,CITY}.

    5.   Check The Golden Rule for S.

    6.   Discard ST' and SC'.

         It follows that:

    ■    If ST and SC are views (as I am assuming), the INSERT violates The Assignment Principle,
         because the tuple for S9 disappears when S, and therefore ST, is recomputed.

    ■    If they are real—in which case Step 5 applies to ST and SC instead of to S—it violates The
         Golden Rule instead, because it causes a tuple for S9 to appear in ST and not SC.2

      Either way, therefore, if user U “sees” just ST and not SC, then user U should not be given
INSERT rights over ST, because such INSERTs will always fail (unless they are “no ops”—or
unless as previously suggested the DBMS has some mechanism for automatically performing the
necessary complementary INSERT into SC; I will not mention this latter possibility again).
      Turning now to DELETE, the update
         DELETE <S1,20> FROM ST , DELETE <S1,London> FROM SC

succeeds regardless of whether ST and SC are real or virtual. By contrast, the update

1
  Except to observe that the idea of an attribute having just one default to be used in all contexts is certainly too rigid.
For example, consider a view defined as the projection over all but STATUS of S WHERE STATUS = 20, for which a
default STATUS value of 20 clearly makes sense, vs. a view defined as the projection over all but STATUS of S
WHERE STATUS ≠ 20, for which a default STATUS value of 20 clearly does not. Consider also the fact that the
projection over all but Z of EXTEND A ADD (z AS Z) is identically equal to A. Further investigation is obviously
needed.
2
   Incidentally, note the implication that if user-visible relvars are always in 6NF, user-visible multiple assignments are
likely to be quite common.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             451
Appendixes                                                                 Appendix E / View Updating


      DELETE <S1,20> FROM ST

fails—if ST and SC are views, it violates The Assignment Principle for SC; if they are real, it
violates The Golden Rule, because it causes a tuple for S1 to appear in SC and not ST. Either way,
therefore, if user U “sees” just ST and not SC, then user U should not be given DELETE rights over
ST, because such DELETEs will always fail (unless they are “no ops”).
      A remark on UPDATE: An UPDATE is basically just a DELETE followed by an INSERT,
and for that reason I have had little to say about UPDATE as such in this appendix. However, there
is one point worth making in connection with UPDATE specifically in the present context.
Consider an attempt to replace the tuple <S1,20> in ST by the tuple <S1,25> (“update the status for
supplier S1 from 20 to 25”). This UPDATE is shorthand for the multiple assignment:
      DELETE <S1,20> FROM ST , INSERT <S1,25> INTO ST

      This multiple assignment in turn is shorthand for the following:

 1.   Materialize ST and SC; call the results ST' and SC', respectively.

 2.   DELETE <S1,20> FROM ST', DELETE ø FROM SC',
      INSERT <S1,25> INTO ST', INSERT ø INTO SC'.

 3.   S := ST' JOIN SC'.

 4.   Check The Assignment Principle.

 5.   Check The Golden Rule.

 6.   Discard ST' and SC'.

       And this algorithm produces exactly the desired effect, regardless of whether ST and SC are
real relvars or views. Approaches that rely on default values, by contrast, have to treat UPDATE as
a special case in order that (e.g.) updating the status for supplier S1 does not have the side effect of
setting the city for supplier S1 to some default value, instead of leaving it unchanged.

Example 2

Let SCP{S#,CITY,P#} be a real relvar. Define projection views S and P thus:
      S ≡ SCP { S#, CITY }
      P ≡ SCP { P#, CITY }

       These views satisfy the constraint that every CITY value appearing in S also appears in P and
vice versa. Analysis similar to that under Example 1 thus shows—in general, and without going
into too much detail—that inserting into or deleting from just one of the two views will always fail
(unless the INSERT or DELETE is a “no op”), while inserting into or deleting from both at the
same time will sometimes succeed.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         452
Appendixes                                                               Appendix E / View Updating


Example 3

Let SSP{S#,CITY,P#,QTY} be a real relvar. Define projection views S and SP thus:
      S ≡ SSP { S#, CITY }
      SP ≡ SSP { S#, P#, QTY }

      These views satisfy the constraint that every S# value appearing in S also appears in SP and
vice versa. Again, therefore, analysis similar to that under Example 1 thus shows—in general, and
without going into too much detail—that:

 ■    Inserting into or deleting from just S fails (unless the INSERT or DELETE is a “no op”).

 ■    Inserting into just SP succeeds so long as the specified S# values already appear in SP (the
      “INSERT” into S in the expansion is really an “INSERT-type assignment” in this case, since
      it is “inserting” some tuples that already exist).

 ■    Deleting from just SP succeeds so long as the specified S# values still appear in SP.

 ■    Inserting into or deleting from both S and SP at the same time sometimes succeeds.

Example 4

So far all of the projections I have considered have been the result of some nonloss decomposition.
What happens otherwise? For example, let V ≡ SP{S#,QTY}. Then INSERTs on V clearly fail, in
general, because (appealing once again to the conceptual implementation algorithm) there is no way
to compute SP from V; that is, inserting the tuple <s,q> into V is virtually certain to violate either
The Assignment Principle or The Golden Rule. As for DELETEs, it might be argued that deleting
a tuple of the form <s,q> from V could be supported by deleting all tuples of the form <s,p,q> from
SP, but even there violations of The Assignment Principle would be likely in practice.
      Note: Given that in principle V could be a real relvar (in which case it would presumably be
updatable), it might be thought that the foregoing state of affairs constitutes a violation of The
Principle of Interchangeability. It does not, however, because such a real relvar V and the view V
discussed above are not interchangeable; in particular, they have different constraints. To be
specific, the constraint for the real relvar is—let us agree for the sake of the example—just:
      FORALL t  V ( TRUE )

But the constraint for the view is
      FORALL t  V ( EXISTS p ( ( SPX(u) ) & ( SPY ) )

where u ≡ EXTEND t ADD (p AS QTY).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       453
Appendixes                                                                              Appendix E / View Updating


SOME REMARKS ON ORTHOGONALITY

In earlier sections, I identified three possible problems with the view updating approach I espouse.
To review briefly, the problems in question are as follows:

    a.   INSERT can sometimes have the effect of inserting into two or more distinct real relvars.
         Likewise, DELETE can sometimes have the effect of deleting from two or more distinct real
         relvars.

    b.   INSERT and DELETE are sometimes not inverses of each other.

    c.   Updating A(AB) (for example) is sometimes not equivalent to updating just A.

      In this section, I want to show how The Principle of Orthogonal Design (also known as the
orthogonality principle, or just orthogonality for short) can help in avoiding such problems. This
principle was first documented in a paper by McGoveran and myself titled “A New Database
Design Principle” (the first of the papers listed under reference [87]). Like the principles of further
normalization, it is concerned with reducing data redundancy in database designs. And the simplest
version of the principle, which is all I want to consider here, is quite straightforward and can be
stated informally as follows:1

         Let A and B be distinct relvars. Then the constraints for A and B should not be such as to
         require the same tuple to appear in both.

       Now, certainly no tuple can be required to appear in both A and B if no tuple can satisfy both
of the associated X constraints AX and BX; enforcing this latter condition thus has the effect of
enforcing what might be regarded as a strong form of orthogonality. In what follows, I limit my
attention to this strong form.
       By way of illustration, consider once again the “nonnegative integer” relvars A and B from the
earlier examples of updating intersections, unions, and differences, with constraints and initial
values as follows:
         A : AX ≡ n  7 : initial value a = 0 4 5 7
             AY ≡ TRUE

         B : BX ≡ n  2 : initial value b = 3 4 6 7 8
             BY ≡ TRUE

      Here it is clearly possible for the very same integer n to satisfy both AX and BX (take n = 4,
for example). And we know from our earlier discussions that (a) some updates (e.g., INSERTs on
AB) will affect both A and B—possibly causing the very same integer (or tuple, rather) to be
inserted into both relvars—and (b) INSERTs and DELETEs will sometimes not be inverses of each
other. So let us examine an example that is similar to the foregoing, except that it is impossible for

1
  It would be more accurate to refer to this “simplest version” as a logical consequence of the principle in its general
form. Indeed, there is much more to be said about orthogonality in general, but this appendix is not the place; a detailed
discussion can be found in the papers listed under reference [87].




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          454
Appendixes                                                               Appendix E / View Updating


the same integer to satisfy both AX and BX. To be specific, let A and B be relvars with constraints
and initial values as follows:
      A : AX ≡ n  4 : initial value a = 0 3 4
      AY ≡ TRUE

      B : BX ≡ n  5 : initial value b = 5 6 8 9
      BY ≡ TRUE

      Observe that:
      ab = ø                                 /* necessarily empty          */
      ab = 0 3 4 5 6 8 9                     /* necessarily disjoint union */
      a-b = 0 3 4                             /* necessarily equal to a     */

      Then, ignoring “no ops” for simplicity, it is easy to see that:

 ■    Intersection: INSERT n INTO AB always fails. DELETE n FROM AB always fails.
      Thus, both INSERT n INTO AB followed by DELETE n FROM AB and DELETE n
      FROM AB followed by INSERT n INTO AB always preserve the status quo, albeit
      trivially.

 ■    Union: INSERT n INTO AB never affects both A and B. DELETE n FROM AB never
      affects both A and B. INSERT n INTO AB followed by DELETE n FROM AB always
      preserves the status quo (recall that we must have n / ab for the INSERT to be valid).
      DELETE n FROM AB followed by INSERT n INTO AB always preserves the status quo
      (recall that we must have n  ab for the DELETE to be valid).

 ■    Difference: Both INSERT n INTO A-B followed by DELETE n FROM A-B and DELETE n
      FROM A-B followed by INSERT n INTO A-B always preserve the status quo (recall that we
      must have n / a for the INSERT to be valid and n  a for the DELETE to be valid).

I leave examples to illustrate the foregoing as an exercise, if you feel they are necessary.
       Recall now Example 1 from the section “Nested Updates” earlier in this appendix. Just to
remind you, we had R ≡ A(BC), and we considered the INSERT-type assignment R := Ri. The
initial values were:
      a = 0 4 5 7 10
      b = 3 4 6 7 8 11
      c = 0 1 2 7 8 9 12

      i = 1 2 3 9

      And the values after the update were:
      A = 0 1 2 3 4 5 7 9 10
      B = 1 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 11
      C = 0 1 2 3 7 8 9 12




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      455
Appendixes                                                               Appendix E / View Updating


      And I pointed out that following this INSERT-type assignment with the DELETE-type
assignment R := R-i would not restore the status quo. But the problem, again, is the fact that the
very same integer (e.g., 7) can appear in any two or even all three of A, B, C (recall that the
constraints AC, BC, CC are all just TRUE). So let us consider an example that is similar to the
previous one but does not permit the same integer to appear in more than one of A, B, C:
      AX ≡ 0  n  4 : initial value a = 0 3 4
      AY ≡ TRUE

      BX = 9  n         : initial value b = 10 11 12
      BY ≡ TRUE

      CX ≡ 5  n  8 : initial value c = 6 7 8
      CY ≡ TRUE

       Then the X constraint RX for R ≡ A(BC) is (AX)|((BX)&(CX)), which reduces to
AX|FALSE, or in other words to just AX. Now take i to be the set of integers 1 2. Then it is easy to
see that R := Ri gives A = 0 1 2 3 4 and leaves B and C unchanged. Moreover, deleting i from the
result now clearly does restore the status quo.
       Consider also the case of updating R ≡ A(AB) (Example 3 from the section “Nested
Updates”). Recall that previously we had the result that inserting into R could affect the value of B,
even though A(AB) is (or should be?) identically equal to A. However, if AX and BX are such
that no value can satisfy them both, then the constraint RX ≡ (AX)|((AX)&(BX)), which again
reduces to just AX. In the update R := Ri, then, no value in i can satisfy BX, the overall update
reduces to just A := Ai, and B remains unchanged—and the principle that view updating is a matter
of semantics, not syntax, is upheld.
       One consequence of all of the above is the following. Let x be a relational expression. If x
appears in a “read-only” position, then the implementation is free to transform it (typically for
optimization purposes) into any logically equivalent expression. But if x appears in an “update”
position, the implementation is not free to perform such a transformation unless it can be sure it is
safe to do so. Adherence to the strong form of orthogonality discussed in this section is a sufficient
condition for ensuring such safety.


A REMARK ON MULTIPLE ASSIGNMENT

Note: Thanks to Hugh Darwen for alerting me to the issue addressed in this section.
      Consider the following example (a modified version of one from the previous section). Let
the “nonnegative integer” relvars A and B have constraints and initial values as follows:

      A : AX ≡ n < 5 : initial value a = 0 3
          AY ≡ TRUE

      B : BX ≡ n > 5 : initial value b = 6 8 9
          BY ≡ TRUE

      Now let R ≡ AB and consider the following multiple assignment




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          456
Appendixes                                                                 Appendix E / View Updating


      INSERT 5 INTO R , UPDATE R WHERE n = 5 ( n := 7 ) ;

       It should be clear that if we expand the constituent assignments separately, the overall
operation will fail; more precisely, the INSERT will fail, because the value 5 does not satisfy the
constraint RX ≡ (n < 5)|(n > 5). Yet the overall operation would clearly succeed if R were real, not
virtual. What is to be done about this situation? One possible solution would be to add another step
to the multiple assignment algorithm—see RM Prescription 21—according to which distinct
assignments to the same virtual relvar are “collected” before Step a. (the syntactic expansion step) is
performed; in the example, this approach would cause the two assignments to be collapsed into one,
and the final result would be A unchanged, B = 6 7 8 9, and R = 0 3 6 7 8 9. But note the
implication that we still might not have the semantics of multiple assignment quite right ... More
study is required.


SUMMARY

In the foregoing sections, I have identified or at least touched on a number of principles, or
objectives, that I believe any systematic approach to the view updating problem needs to satisfy. I
summarize those principles here for purposes of future reference. (The summary that follows is
based on a similar but less extensive one given in reference [76], but differs from that earlier one in
several details.)

 1.   Relations only: I am interested in a relational mechanism specifically; in particular, I have no
      interest in trying to extend my view-updating scheme to support “relations” that contain either
      nulls or duplicate tuples. In fact, I would resist any attempt to do so, if it meant
      compromising on any of the other objectives.

 2.   The Assignment Principle: After assignment of x to relvar R, the comparison R = x must
      evaluate to TRUE, otherwise the assignment fails.

 3.   The Golden Rule: After assignment of x to relvar R, R must satisfy its constraint RC,
      otherwise the assignment fails. (If R is virtual, it is sufficient, in order to ensure that R
      satisfies RC, to ensure that the relvars R1, R2, ..., Rn in terms of which R is defined satisfy
      their constraints R1C, R2C, ..., RnC, respectively.)

 4.   INSERT- and DELETE-type assignments only: Any relational assignment can be expressed in
      the form R := R-di; thus, all such assignments can be expressed as a suitable combination of
      INSERT- and DELETE-type assignments. UPDATE in particular is shorthand for an
      assignment of the form R := WITH R-d AS R: Ri.

 5.   Relvar constraints (this one is a conjecture on my part, but it is easy to see that the conjecture
      is at least trivially true): Relvar constraints can always be expressed in the form (FORALL t 
      R (RX)) & (RY), where RX is a quantifier-free predicate with at most one parameter—namely,
      t—and RY is a proposition, in general not quantifier free.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                             457
Appendixes                                                                 Appendix E / View Updating


 6.   Semantics not syntax: The semantics of view updating should not depend on the particular
      syntactic form in which the view definition in question happens to be stated.

 7.   The Principle of Interchangeability: The rules must work for real relvars too.

 8.   Symmetry: Operands to symmetric operations should be treated symmetrically. (This
      principle fundamentally applies to unions and joins; the other symmetric operators, intersect
      and cartesian product, are just special cases of join.)

 9.   All updates supported: Every relvar should support all three of INSERT / DELETE /
      UPDATE.

10.   Inverse operations: INSERT and DELETE should be inverses of each other.

11.   Recursion: The rules must be capable of recursive application (i.e., “nested updates” should
      work satisfactorily).

12.   Database design: The rules cannot assume the database is well designed (though they might
      occasionally produce results that some might find counterintuitive if it is not).

       I have presented an approach to view updating that, I believe, goes a long way toward
meeting the foregoing objectives. The approach in question is based on ideas originally articulated
in references [88] and [114], but I have found it necessary to dot a lot of i’s and cross a lot of t’s in
order to get it into the shape described herein—which, let me be the first to say, doubtless still needs
a considerable amount of polishing in order to make it anywhere close to watertight. As noted
earlier, however, I feel cautiously optimistic about the approach, for the following reasons among
others:

 ■    No views are inherently nonupdatable (though certain specific updates will fail on violations
      of either The Assignment Principle or The Golden Rule).

 ■    Join views in particular are always updatable (again, modulo violations of The Assignment
      Principle or The Golden Rule); it is not a matter of whether the join in question is one to one,
      one to many, or many to many.

 ■    The approach gives a predictable result in every case.

 ■    Moreover, it gives the intuitively expected and useful result in most cases (possibly not all).

 ■    If The Principle of Orthogonal Design is followed, the number of cases (it is tempting to call
      them pathological) in which the result might be “unexpected” is further reduced.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          458
Appendixes                                                                  Appendix E / View Updating


DARWEN’s APPROACH

This final section describes Darwen’s objections to Date’s approach and sketches one that he might
support—one that is more conservative in some respects and more ambitious in others. For the
remainder of this appendix, therefore, the first person singular refers to Darwen.

                                       ———  ———

My objection to Date’s approach is simply that the rules for inserting through union and deleting
through join require the system sometimes to make an arbitrary interpretation of an ambiguous
request. I maintain instead that ambiguous requests should be rejected.
      As a basis for the discussions to follow, I now introduce some notation, of my own personal
preference (the notation in question was mentioned in Chapter 2 but not much used elsewhere in
this book). Let R be a relvar. Then I define the expression R(t) to be equivalent to the truth-valued
expression t  R. The notation appeals to my perception of a relvar as representing a time-varying
truth-valued function—the extension of the relvar predicate varies over time (though the intension
of course does not). Thus, the expression R(t) can be thought of as denoting an invocation of that
function.

Objections to Date’s Proposals for Updating Unions and Joins

In order to illustrate my objections here, I consider the simplest database imaginable that is
sufficient for the purpose at hand: one consisting of just two relvars, both of degree zero. (I
deliberately violate the strong form of The Principle of Orthogonal Design here. That strong form
is a principle I certainly do not hold with at all, a point I will return to later.) To give my example a
semblance of realism, imagine the enterprise to be a shop. At all times the shop is either open for
business or closed. The shop is equipped with a burglar alarm. At all times the alarm is either set
or not set. The purpose of the database is to record (a) whether or not the shop is open and (b)
whether or not the alarm is set. Assume until further notice that the two variables are not subject to
any constraint, even though it might seem a little peculiar to allow the alarm to be set while the shop
is open. Here is the Tutorial D definition:
      VAR THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN REAL RELATION { } KEY { } ;

      VAR THE_ALARM_IS_SET REAL RELATION { } KEY { } ;
      Either of the following statements will suffice to record the fact that the shop is open:
      THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN := TABLE_DEE ;

      INSERT THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN TABLE_DEE ;

Likewise, either of the following will suffice to record the fact that the alarm is not set:
      THE_ALARM_IS_SET := TABLE_DUM ;

      DELETE THE_ALARM_IS_SET ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          459
Appendixes                                                                 Appendix E / View Updating


Just to remind you, TABLE_DEE is shorthand for RELATION{TUPLE{}}, the relation with no
attributes and just one tuple (the 0-tuple), and TABLE_DUM is shorthand for RELATION{}{}, the
relation with no attributes and no tuples at all.
       Observe now that, using my R(t) notation, the expression
      THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN ( TUPLE { } )

is a formal assertion of the truth of the proposition “The shop is open.” I will abbreviate it from this
point forward to just
      THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN ( )

And I will define the expression
      THE_ALARM_IS_SET ( )

(“The alarm is set”) analogously.
       In accordance with certain ideas previously articulated in reference [85], I would also like to
introduce some new notation for updating the database. In The Third Manifesto, we regard
relational assignment as the fundamental update operator, and of course I have no problem with that
position. For present purposes, however (and possibly others), I prefer to think of expressing belief
in a single “atomic” proposition as being even more fundamental than relational assignment. To
“insert a tuple” into a relvar is to express belief in the truth of the proposition represented by the
appearance of that tuple in that relvar; to “delete a tuple” from a relvar is to express the
corresponding disbelief (i.e., belief in the truth of the negation of that proposition). In keeping with
that perception, I will use imperatives of the following deliberately verbose form
      IT IS [ NOT ] THE CASE THAT R ( [ t ] ) ;

where the 0-tuple is implicit if t is omitted. So IT IS THE CASE THAT R(t) is equivalent to R := R
UNION RELATION{t} and also to INSERT R RELATION{t}; likewise, IT IS NOT THE CASE
THAT R(t) is equivalent to R := R MINUS RELATION{t} and also to some DELETE statement.
Thus, for example, to record the opening of the shop for business and the simultaneous turning off
of the alarm, I can write
      IT IS THE CASE THAT THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN ( ) ,
      IT IS NOT THE CASE THAT THE_ALARM_IS_SET ( ) ;

(a multiple assignment).

      Now let me introduce a couple of views:
      VAR THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN_OR_THE_ALARM_IS_SET VIRTUAL
        ( THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN UNION THE_ALARM_IS_SET ) ;

      VAR THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN_AND_THE_ALARM_IS_SET VIRTUAL
        ( THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN JOIN THE_ALARM_IS_SET ) ;

      Under Date’s proposals the following updates would both be legal:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         460
Appendixes                                                               Appendix E / View Updating


      IT IS THE CASE THAT THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN_OR_THE_ALARM_IS_SET ( ) ;

      IT IS NOT THE CASE THAT THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN_AND_THE_ALARM_IS_SET ( ) ;

       Under the semantics of UNION and JOIN, those two update statements both mean exactly
what they say, and therefore they are both ambiguous—indeterminate—as far as the required effect
on the database is concerned. The first can be implemented by assigning TABLE_DEE to either
THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN or THE_ALARM_IS_SET, or both. Date proposes that the DBMS be
required to choose the third possibility, advancing an observation regarding symmetry as
justification. Similarly, the second can be implemented by assigning TABLE_DUM to either
THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN or THE_ALARM_IS_SET, or both, and again Date’s proposal requires the
DBMS to choose the third possibility and again the observation regarding symmetry is advanced as
justification. I remark that this justification could also be used to allow an expression of the form
x+y (or a name standing for that expression, to make the analogy with views a little closer) to be the
target of an assignment: If z is the value to be assigned, just assign z/2 to both x and y.
       In my opinion, however, both updates should be rejected. The reader who thinks that position
harsh should perhaps consider what advantages database users might gain from the proposals that I
am rejecting. The ability to insert through union? Well, if I, the designer of
THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN and THE_ALARM_IS_SET, really want my users to be able to insert into
their union, I would resort to the following artifice in the view definition:
      VAR THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN_OR_THE_ALARM_IS_SET VIRTUAL
        ( WITH RELATION { TUPLE { STATUS 'open'    } } AS OPEN,
               RELATION { TUPLE { STATUS 'alarmed' } } AS ALARMED :
      ( THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN JOIN OPEN ) UNION ( THE_ALARM_IS_SET JOIN ALARMED ) ) ;

      Here it is clear that the operands of the UNION are disjoint. Now, for example, the opening
of the shop can be expressed as:
      IT IS THE CASE THAT THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN_OR_THE_ALARM_IS_SET
                            ( TUPLE { STATUS 'open' } ) ;

      Similarly, the turning off of the alarm can be expressed as:
      IT IS NOT THE CASE THAT THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN_OR_THE_ALARM_IS_SET
                                ( TUPLE { STATUS 'alarmed' } ) ;

       I assume here that the two joins and the union mentioned in the view definition would indeed
be updatable, under both Date’s proposal and the proper subset of that proposal that I believe I
would not object to. (I use JOIN rather than EXTEND in the view definition just to float the idea
that a dyadic operator invocation might be updatable even if only one of its operands is a variable.)
       Now let me get back to the original view definitions:
      VAR THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN_OR_THE_ALARM_IS_SET VIRTUAL
        ( THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN UNION THE_ALARM_IS_SET ) ;

      VAR THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN_AND_THE_ALARM_IS_SET VIRTUAL
        ( THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN JOIN THE_ALARM_IS_SET ) ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       461
Appendixes                                                                  Appendix E / View Updating


       I note in passing, incidentally, that if these two views are the only relvars ever used as targets
of update operations, then under Date’s approach they will always be equal in value in spite of the
stark logical difference (OR vs. AND) in the predicates they represent. Be that as it may, here again
are the two updates previously discussed on the foregoing views:
      IT IS THE CASE THAT THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN_OR_THE_ALARM_IS_SET ( ) ;

      IT IS NOT THE CASE THAT THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN_AND_THE_ALARM_IS_SET ( ) ;

      I have shown that these updates are indeterminate. However, I agree that if those
indeterminacies can be resolved by the existence of an appropriate constraint, then the update in
question might be permitted. For example, suppose the shop sensibly decides that it is not a good
idea ever to set the alarm when it is open for business:
      CONSTRAINT NOT_ALARMED_WHEN_OPEN
         IS_EMPTY ( THE_SHOP_IS_OPEN JOIN THE_ALARM_IS_SET ) ;

       But this particular constraint does not resolve the indeterminacies. For the first update, the
DBMS knows that just one of the two underlying real relvars is to be assigned TABLE_DEE, but it
does not know which. For the second, all three possibilities satisfy the constraint.
       Date also advances, in connection with his position on insert through union, a certain “strong
form” of The Principle of Orthogonal Design, observing that results such as the one I object to are
avoided if that strong form of the principle is followed. (I remark that there does not seem to be a
counterpart to this observation that could apply to delete through join, except in the special case
where the join degenerates to intersection.) I do not hold with this strong form of the principle at
all. I see no advantage, ever—and sometimes positive disadvantage—in choosing a design that
adheres to it over one that does not, as I now explain.

Objections to Invoking “the Strong Form of Orthogonality”

Date gives the following informal definition of (a certain logical consequence of) The Principle of
Orthogonal Design:

      Let A and B be distinct relvars. Then the constraints for A and B should not be such as to
      require the same tuple to appear in both.

      I cannot dispute that any violation of this principle, as far as it goes, would lead to
redundancy, but I remark that it does not go very far. There are many ways in which redundancy
can occur without the same tuple appearing in two relvars. For example, let relvars A and B have
the same heading except that one attribute of B has a different name (say Y instead of X) from its
counterpart in A. Further, let there be a constraint in effect that requires A to be equal at all times to
B RENAME (Y AS X). This case is perhaps the simplest of the many that are not covered by the
principle as stated. (Date does not disagree with this observation; in fact, he and I have worked
together on the more general definition of the principle, as given in the last of the papers listed
under reference [87].)
      But Date continues:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           462
Appendixes                                                                 Appendix E / View Updating


      Now, certainly no tuple can be required to appear in both A and B if no tuple can satisfy both
      of the associated X constraints AX and BX; enforcing this latter condition thus has the effect of
      enforcing what might be regarded as a strong form of orthogonality. In what follows, I limit
      my attention to this strong form.

And he goes on to show that adherence to this “strong form” will avoid the undesired effects that
sometimes arise in his approach to the updating of unions and joins.
      I perceive a tacit suggestion here that adherence to the strong form of orthogonality is a good
database design principle to follow, especially if undesired effects of update operations are to be
avoided. I disagree on two counts:

 1.   I disagree with the tacit suggestion, because (a) as I have already explained, even the weak
      form given in Date’s informal definition only scratches the surface of redundancy, and (b) the
      strong form does not appear to address any cases of redundancy that the weak form misses
      and, worse, rules out many designs that do not entail redundancy at all.

 2.   I disagree with the idea that a database should be designed “correctly” or “appropriately” in
      order to ensure that operators never have undesired effects—in particular, effects that
      represent unsafe conclusions from the premises that are represented by invocations of update
      operators (under our agreed interpretation).

As applied to 2-tuples, for example, the strong form of orthogonality seems to be saying that the
database should not permit the same two things to be related to each other in two or more different
ways—or, at least, should not permit such facts to be represented in the most obvious way (by
allowing the same 2-tuple to appear in several relvars). This state of affairs strikes me as being a
violation of orthogonality! (in a possibly different sense of that term). Moreover, my
characterization is not entirely accurate either (hence “seems”), because for two 2-tuples to be
identical their headings need to consist of the same set of attributes (and hence involve the same set
of attribute names in particular). Therefore, if I want to be able to record, for example, that a pair of
cousins happen also to be a married couple, I can do so without violating the strong form of the
principle by choosing different attribute names for the two relvars: MARRIED{A,B} and
COUSINS{A,C}, for example. But to place a restriction on my freedom of choice of attribute
names strikes me also as a violation of orthogonality.
       As applied to 1-tuples, the strong form of orthogonality is effectively saying that the database
should not permit the same thing to have more than one “property” (a term used by some logicians
to characterize monadic predicates). Consider, for example, the predicates “Employee E is on
vacation” and “Employee E is awaiting phone number allocation.” What more natural way is there
of representing those than defining two unary relvars with those very predicates? What problems
are solved by adopting a different approach? (I see none of any significance.) What problems arise
in that different approach? (For the different approaches I find myself able to imagine, apart from
the simple one of choosing different attribute names for those two E’s, I see significant problems
arising.)
       I turn now to Date’s claim that orthogonal design “is concerned with reducing data
redundancy.” I have already mentioned that his informal definition does not really go very far
toward addressing the redundancy question. This issue is dealt with in the papers (excluding the




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          463
Appendixes                                                              Appendix E / View Updating


first such) listed under reference [87]. However, those papers also question whether redundancy
really can or must always be avoided; they even show that there might be cases where redundancy
is positively desirable (though in such cases it should at least be properly controlled).
       So we have:

 1.   A desire, arising frequently but possibly not always, to avoid redundancy in database designs

 2.   A design principle, The Principle of Orthogonal Design, adherence to which goes some way
      toward avoiding redundancy

 3.   One stated consequence of that principle, covering just the special case where redundancy
      involves having more than one appearance of the very same tuple

 4.   A “strong form” of that consequence whereby the cases covered by it can be addressed
      without knowledge of the declared constraints, by avoiding altogether the possibility of
      having more than one appearance of the very same tuple, regardless of whether such
      appearances would represent redundancy

 5.   An observation that adherence to that strong form eliminates the undesired effects that can
      otherwise result from certain update operations

I accept Points 1 and 2. I see no real value in mentioning Point 3 in connection with the issue of
redundancy. It follows that I see no real value in Point 4, in spite of the slight relief from burden
offered to the database designer who would like to be sure of adhering to Point 3 regardless of what
constraints are declared. Besides, to compensate for the burden it avoids, it introduces a new
burden to which I strongly object. It further follows, from my rejection of Point 4 and from the fact
noted in point 1 that we do not always want to avoid redundancy, that Point 5 does nothing to
address my objections to Date’s proposals for updating views.
       That concludes my objections to Date’s proposals. The question now arises, to what extent do
I think views might be updatable? And what general principles underlie my position? I address the
second question first.

Principles

I accept The Golden Rule without question.
       I accept The Assignment Principle without question but not without comment. Of course, any
update operator invocation is equivalent to some assignment (possibly multiple). What assignment
it is equivalent to depends on the definition of the operator being invoked. For example, we have
given what we think are reasonable, useful, and intuitive definitions for the familiar INSERT,
DELETE, and UPDATE operators in terms of relational assignment. It follows that every INSERT,
DELETE, or UPDATE invocation should have the same effect on its target relvar as the assignment
to which it is equivalent; for if not, The Assignment Principle is violated. My comment is that it
might be possible to subvert the intent of The Assignment Principle by defining perverse update
operators (a possibility I actually consider in my notes on UPDATE through extension and
UPDATE through JOIN).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         464
Appendixes                                                                 Appendix E / View Updating


      As already noted, I reject the strong form of The Principle of Orthogonal Design.
      I propose the following two additional principles:

 ■    The Principle of No Ambiguity: If relation r is to be assigned to view R, then there must exist
      exactly one corresponding set of assignments to the real relvars on which R is defined such
      that The Golden Rule and The Assignment Principle are adhered to; otherwise, the
      assignment is rejected.

 ■    The Principle of View and Pseudovariable Equivalence: Every permitted assignment to view
      R is also permitted, with exactly the same effect, to the expression x on which R is defined.
      (That expression x, when appearing as a target, is therefore acting as a pseudovariable.)

      Note: I state the second of these principles only because Date does not do so explicitly
himself. We are not in disagreement here. Indeed, we mentioned the possibility of using relational
expressions as pseudovariables in Chapter 5, and Date referred to it also in the section of this
appendix titled “Nested Updates.”
      In the remaining subsections, I provide some notes on each operator of the relational algebra
through which I see some reasonable opportunity for updatability. I have put these notes together
with more haste than usual, as a result of the lateness of our decision to include this appendix. The
serious student should scrutinize them carefully and perhaps with a certain amount of suspicion.

Rename

If view V is defined on some invocation of RENAME on relvar R1, then all update operations on V
are permitted and are effected by transforming them into operations on R1 merely by replacing
references to attributes of V by references to the corresponding attributes of R1.

Projection

If view V is defined on some projection of relvar R1, then deletions from V are permitted but
insertions, in general, are not.
       The relvar predicate, P say, for V is
      EXISTS x ( R1 ( x  y ) )

where x is a tuple whose heading consists of the attributes of R1 that are excluded by the projection
and y is a tuple consisting of the remaining attributes of R1.
       To delete tuple y from V is to deny that there exists such an x (i.e., to assert that NOT P). The
only way of achieving that effect is to delete all tuples of the form xy from R1.
       To insert tuple y into V is to assert that there does exist such an x. In general, there are many
equally reasonable ways of achieving that effect and to choose one of those ways would be
arbitrary. Now, some writers have proposed to treat as special the case where all of the attributes of
the heading of x have default values defined for them. My objection to that proposal is that we
cannot safely conclude, given that there exists at least one x that makes R1(xy) evaluate to TRUE,
that there exists exactly one such x; hence, to insert exactly one tuple into R1 would be arbitrary.
However, it has been proposed (and this proposal has been implemented in more than one product)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         465
Appendixes                                                                  Appendix E / View Updating


to make a special case of projections whose attributes include a key of R1, simply because of the
existence of an explicit constraint to the effect that there cannot now exist more than one such x, so
to insert a single tuple is not arbitrary after all.
      A further thought: It might be possible to allow V to appear as the target of an UPDATE
without the foregoing INSERT limitation (to the effect that the attributes of V must include a key of
R1). For example, if V is defined as EMP {SALARY}, we could give everybody a 10% salary
increase as follows:
       UPDATE V ( SALARY := SALARY * 1.1 )

     Is it really so important for UPDATE to be shorthand for DELETE followed by INSERT? I
suppose we can keep it that way with a bit of sleight of hand, by defining it as DELETE-but-
remember-the-deleted-tuples, then apply the updates to the remembered tuples, then INSERT. For
UPDATE through projection we would have to propagate those three steps to the underlying relvar.

Restriction

If V is defined on some conjunction R1 AND p and p is quantifier free, then V is either a restriction
or an extension of R1. If it is a restriction, then all update operations are permitted on V and are
effected by transforming them into operations on R1. An attempt to insert tuple t is rejected if p(t)
is false (because “p(t) false” contradicts V(t)). To delete t from V is to deny R1(t), because the truth
of p(t) is not subject to change, so the deletion can safely be effected by deleting t from R1.

Extension

Following on from the previous subsection, if V is an extension of R1, then all deletions are
permitted, and are effected by transforming them into deletions from R1 in an obvious manner (the
details are tedious but straightforward). The justification for permitting deletions is analogous to
the justification already given in connection with restrictions. Insertions are permitted with a
proviso analogous to that already given in connection with restrictions.
       UPDATE through extension is a case where The Assignment Principle might be seen as an
annoyance. Intuitively it seems not unreasonable (and possibly desirable) to permit UPDATE
invocations that affect only those attributes of V that are inherited from R1, with the additional
attributes of V being recomputed. This treatment might be acceptable if some agreeable extension
to the definition of UPDATE can be formulated such that The Assignment Principle is not violated
under it.

Join

If V is defined on some conjunction R1 AND R2, then V is the join of R1 and R2 (with R1
INTERSECT R2 and, if the heading of R2 is a subset of that of R1, R1 MATCHING R2 as
degenerate but not special cases). Insertions into V are permitted; for IT IS THE CASE THAT V(t)
is equivalent to R1(u) AND R2(v), where u is the projection of t over the attributes of R1 and v is
the projection of t over the attributes of R2. (I assume that inserting a tuple that already exists in the
target relvar is a “no op.”) However, deletions from V are not permitted, in general, for IT IS NOT
THE CASE THAT V(t) can be effected by any of the following logically distinct invocations:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           466
Appendixes                                                               Appendix E / View Updating


 1.   IT IS NOT THE CASE THAT R1(u) ;

 2.   IT IS NOT THE CASE THAT R2(v) ;

 3.   IT IS NOT THE CASE THAT R1(u) , IT IS NOT THE CASE THAT R2(v) ;

(No. 3 is a multiple assignment.) Because R1 and R2 are both subject to change, it is not possible to
identify exactly one of these invocations to effect deletion of t from V.
       Note: I would relax the foregoing general prohibition in cases where exactly one of the
choices satisfies both The Golden Rule and The Assignment Principle. I would also consider
relaxing the prohibition in the specific case where the common attributes of R1 and R2 include a
key of R2. Some people advocate supporting deletion (and therefore UPDATE) in such cases by
propagating the operation to R1 only. The justification for this position is that each tuple being
deleted from V has exactly one matching tuple in R1, as a consequence of which The Assignment
Principle is guaranteed to hold. In the case where the matching tuple in R2 is matched by no other
tuples in R1, The Assignment Principle also holds if that matching tuple is deleted from R2, but it
seems reasonable to resolve the ambiguity by applying the same treatment as in the more general
case. Unfortunately, this relaxation for many-to-one joins would appear to have to permit deletion
from both operands in the one-to-one case where the common attributes include a key of R1 as well
as a key of R2. If you think this treatment of DELETE seems a bit suspect (as it does to me, at
least), I remark that it does seem utterly reasonable to permit UPDATE in these cases, noting that if
common attributes are affected then we would have a possible violation of The Assignment
Principle on our hands (and again I very tentatively wonder about the possibility of extending the
definition of UPDATE to avoid such violation).

Union

If V is defined on some disjunction R1 OR p, then we are talking about R1 UNION R2 (because
other kinds of disjunction where R1 is one of the disjuncts are not permitted). The situation is the
inverse of what applies in the conjunction cases. Inserting into V is prohibited, because IT IS THE
CASE THAT V(t) can be effected by any of the following logically distinct invocations:

 1.   IT IS THE CASE THAT R1(u) ;

 2.   IT IS THE CASE THAT R2(v) ;

 3.   IT IS THE CASE THAT R1(u) , IT IS THE CASE THAT R2(v) ;

(where, as it happens, u = v = t). There is no justification for choosing exactly one of these three
possibilities over the other two. However, all deletions are permitted. Deleting t from V is effected
by deleting u from R1 and v from R2 (i.e., deleting t from both R1 and R2).
      The prohibition on insertion might be relaxed when there is a constraint to the effect that R1
and R2 be at all times disjoint, provided that the constraint in question can be used to determine to
which unique operand a given tuple, proffered for insertion, must belong. For example, the
constraint NOT_ALARMED_WHEN_OPEN given in the subsection “Objection to The Principle of




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      467
Appendixes                                                               Appendix E / View Updating


Orthogonal Design” cannot be used for the purpose at hand. However, a constraint such as the
following (expressed for convenience in logic notation)
      FORALL t ( R1(t)  t.A > 5 & R2(t)  t.A  5 )

could perhaps be used. For any given tuple t the system needs only to evaluate the expression
t.A > 5 to determine whether t is to be inserted into R1 or R2 (not both). A common shorthand for
constraints such as these allows one to write something like CHECK A > 5 inside the relvar
definition; use of such syntax might make it comparatively easy for the system to determine at
compile time whether the constraint can be used to disambiguate inserts into unions.

Semidifference

If V is defined on R1 AND NOT (p), then either p is not subject to change, in which case the rules
for restriction apply, or we are talking about R1 NOT MATCHING R2 (with R1 MINUS R2 as a
degenerate but I hope not special case).
       Insertion into V might be permitted. IT IS THE CASE THAT V(t) is equivalent to
      IT IS THAT CASE THAT R1(u) , IT IS NOT THE CASE THAT EXISTS w (R2(v  w)) ;

(where u = t, v is the projection of t over the common attributes, and w is a tuple whose heading
consists of the remaining attributes of R2). One approach would be to adopt the same rules as for
restriction (i.e., treating R2 as immutable via inserts into V). Another approach would be to effect
the insertion of t into V by inserting u into R1 and deleting v from the projection of R2 over the
common attributes.
       Deletion might also be permitted, for the only reasonable way in general of effecting the
deletion of t from V is to delete it from R1 and do nothing to R2. However, I remark that in the
special case of R1 MINUS R2, inserting t into R2 appears to have just as much merit as deleting it
from R1—and I have already said I do not want to treat R1 MINUS R2 as a special case.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       468