                                                        Appendix F

        A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint

Our inheritance model requires support for specialization by constraint (S by C). You might recall,
however, that after we had explained the basic idea of S by C in Chapter 14, we said this:

         But there is much, much more to be said on this topic: so much, in fact, that it seemed better
         not to include it all in the body of the chapter [but] instead to relegate most of it to [this
         appendix].

      We also said the topic was controversial; in fact, we excluded it from our original model [82],
basically because everyone else seemed to have done the same thing (not a very good reason!).
Why, then, is there this broad sentiment against S by C? The answer seems to do with performance;
there seems to be a widespread belief that S by C is difficult to implement efficiently and must
perform badly. Now, performance by definition is not a model concern—we would always rather
get the model right first and worry about the implementation afterward—but we do have some
thoughts on the performance issue, which we will discuss in the section “Implementation
Considerations” later in this appendix. First, however, we would like to take a closer look at S by C
from the perspective of the model, and that is the primary purpose of this appendix.
      The discussion is structured as follows. The two sections immediately following this
introductory material offer a brief historical review. The following sections then summarize the
benefits of S by C and suggest that the reason it has typically not been supported in the past is
because most work on inheritance has been done in an object setting. The final section offers some
thoughts on implementation and performance. Note: To keep the appendix shorter than it might be,
we assume—where it makes any difference (actually in very few places)—that we are dealing with
single inheritance only and scalar types only.


THE 3 OUT OF 4 “RULE”

It is instructive to begin by taking a look at a historical issue that is directly related to the S by C
controversy. The issue in question is known as “the 3 out of 4 rule,”1 and it turns out that S by C—
or, rather, generalization by constraint (G by C), which is part of the same overall phenomenon, of
course—is the key to resolving it.
        We have said that S by C is controversial. Just to remind you, S by C means the system
should be aware that, e.g., if an ellipse has equal semiaxes, it is really a circle. Now, we have
assumed throughout this book, tacitly, that the inverse notion—i.e., that the system should be aware
that, e.g., if an ellipse is really a circle, its semiaxes must be equal—is not controversial at all; in
fact, of course, it is just a type constraint on circles, and we have tacitly assumed that type



1
    We call your attention to the deliberately different positioning of the quotation marks in the title to this section.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                                 469
Appendixes                                        Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


constraints are obviously desirable. Indeed, without type constraints we do not even have a way of
specifying the values that go to make up a given type.
      Not everyone agrees with us on this point, however (in other words, our position on type
constraints is controversial as well). Consider the following extract from reference [137]:
      We can list four features of a subtyping mechanism that all seem to be desirable, yet ... it is not possible to
      combine them in a single type system. The four features are:

      ● Substitutability
      ● Static type checking
      ● Mutability
      ● Type constraints

      [We break in at this point in order to explain a couple of matters. First, “mutability” just means updatability; as
      mentioned in Chapter 6, mutator is the object term for what we call an update operator (the object term for a
      read-only operator, you will recall, being observer). Second, reference [137] identifies the last feature in the list
      not as type constraints but rather as specialization via constraints. But it does not mean by that term quite what
      we mean by S by C. Rather, it refers to the more fundamental notion—of which S by C is a logical
      consequence—that type T' might be defined as a “constrained” form of type T; in other words, it really is talking
      about type constraints. To continue:]

      All four of these properties seem to be desirable ... We submit, however, that it is impossible to have all four of
      them in the same type system. This conflict can be illustrated with the following example. [We have replaced
      the example given in reference [137] by one that is essentially similar but conforms to our own notation and our
      own running example. Also, for consistency with the body of the present book, we use LENGTH as a selector,
      despite the fact that we have argued in Appendix C that, e.g., LENGTH_IN_INCHES would be preferable.]

      VAR E ELLIPSE ;
      VAR C CIRCLE ;

      C := CIRCLE ( LENGTH ( 3.0 ), ... ) ;
      E := C ;
      THE_A ( E ) := LENGTH ( 4.0 ) ;

      [The first assignment initializes C to a circle of radius three.] The [second] assignment must be allowed ... if we
      have substitutability and mutability ... The [third assignment] would type-check at compile time ... Of course,
      [that assignment] ... will fail [at run time] even though the compile-time check determined that it was all right.

      [And the extract concludes:]

      We observe that any three of the four features seem to work just fine. No one of them is obviously the one that
      must be discarded, but in any type system, at least one of them must be sacrificed to achieve consistency with the
      others.

      Now, perhaps you can see right away what is wrong with this argument. To be specific, in
our model, G by C would occur on the third assignment, MST(E) would become ELLIPSE again,
and everything would indeed “work just fine.” However, reference [137] does not consider the
possibility of G by C, so let us agree to ignore that possibility ourselves for a while and see where
the argument takes us. We begin by taking a closer look at the four features and seeing how each
relates to the example at hand:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             470
Appendixes                              Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


 ■   Substitutability: As explained in Chapter 14, type inheritance implies substitutability (value
     substitutability, at any rate), so this feature cannot possibly be discarded. The second
     assignment in the example appeals to value substitutability.

 ■   Static type checking: Reference [137] defines static type checking to mean that “there is no
     need to insert expensive run-time [type] checks [into the compiled] code, and also the coder
     can be assured that [run-time type] errors can never occur.” In our inheritance model, by
     contrast, run-time type errors certainly can occur in the context of TREAT (though nowhere
     else), even if static type checking is performed. So perhaps it can be claimed that static type
     checking—full static type checking, that is, in the sense of reference [137]—is the feature we
     have discarded.
            However, we would argue that to insist that everything be fully type-checkable at
     compile time is to throw the baby out with the bathwater. For example, consider the
     following code fragment:
     VAR L LENGTH ;

     E := C ;
     L := THE_R ( E ) ;

     The expression THE_R(E) will fail on a compile-time type check, of course. So now we have
     no way to obtain the radius of the circle that is the current value of E (we cannot use TREAT,
     because TREAT intrinsically cannot be fully type-checked at compile time). So there is
     really no point in saying that the current value of E is of type CIRCLE; we might as well have
     converted that circle to make it “just an ellipse” when we assigned C to E. So we have lost
     substitutability!—and therefore the whole idea of type inheritance, in fact.

 ■   Mutability: As noted earlier, mutability just means updatability. Updatability in turn implies
     support for variables and assignment (and the example does involve variables and assignment,
     obviously). Now, we did say in Chapter 1 that a functional-style language would not need
     variables or assignment as such, so we might be persuaded that mutability could be discarded
     (though we doubt whether this interpretation is what the authors of reference [137] had in
     mind). And even if the language is imperative in style, as Tutorial D is, and therefore does
     require variables and assignment, we could certainly be persuaded—indeed, it is obvious—
     that assignment is the only update operator (or mutator) that is logically necessary. But that
     still leaves us with mutability as a sine qua non.
           Note: It is possible that what reference [137] means by the term mutability is not
     assignment as such, but rather the idea that certain mutators work in such a way as to assign to
     some component of their target while leaving other components unchanged (as in the
     assignment to THE_A(E) in the example). If so, then we have already argued under RM
     Prescription 5 in Chapter 6 that such operators are very desirable in practice, despite the fact
     that in the final analysis they are also logically unnecessary.

 ■   Type constraints: As already indicated, reference [137] does not consider the possibility of G
     by C. As a consequence, it observes that if type constraint checking is done, then the
     assignment to THE_A(E) will fail at run time. To be more specific, it fails because the most




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      471
Appendixes                                         Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


        specific type of the target is CIRCLE, and assignment to THE_A for a circle will, in general,
        violate the constraint on circles that a = b.1 It follows that, if we want the assignment not to
        fail at run time, the system must not be informed of the constraint. But this conclusion is
        surely unacceptable; surely, the more constraints the system is aware of and can enforce, the
        better (we surely want our data to be as correct as possible at all times).

       Now, in reference [111], Mattos and DeMichiel examine the foregoing claims and conclude
that type constraint checking (and enforcement) is indeed the feature that must be discarded. Their
analysis goes somewhat as follows:

       Can we discard substitutability? Well, no: As we have already seen, substitutability—value
        substitutability, that is—cannot possibly be thrown away without undermining the whole idea
        (and point) of type inheritance.

       Can we discard static type checking? Well, no: Discarding static type checking is highly
        undesirable, of course, and in any case it solves nothing—in the example, the assignment to
        THE_A(E) will still fail at run time.

       Can we discard mutability? Well, no: We must have assignment, at least (assuming the
        language is imperative in style), and component-level update operators are highly desirable
        too in practice. (We note in passing that in fact reference [111] does assume that the term
        mutability refers specifically to the idea of component-level updating, not just to assignment
        in general.)

      Reference [111] thus concludes that “the most appropriate [solution] is to not permit
specialization via constraints” (meaning, to say it again, that they advocate not enforcing, or even
declaring, type constraints). They claim that to do otherwise would mean “[forcing] the
overloading of all [operators] defined on supertypes.” We should immediately explain that by
“overloading” here, they really mean defining new implementation versions, to use the terminology
of Chapter 14;2 in terms of our example, that is, they are claiming that assignment to THE_A would
have to be “overloaded” for a circle in such a way as to have the side effect of assignment to
THE_B too, so that the circle still satisfies the constraint a = b after the update. And they go on to
say:

        This option [i.e., of forcing “overloading”] seems to be unacceptable because we believe that ... users are not
        likely to define type hierarchies themselves, but to buy them as class libraries from third-party vendors. It is an
        important requirement that users be able to define ... subtypes of these type hierarchies [sic] ... If we force all
        operators to be overloaded, users will have to redefine every [operator] provided by the class libraries whenever
        they need to [define such a subtype].



1
  We do not agree with this argument, of course—we are just doing our best to explain the point of view of reference
[137].
2
  Note in particular, therefore, that they are not using the term overloading as we did in Chapters 6 and 14 to mean
something that is properly part of the model; rather, they are using it to mean something that is of concern to the
implementation merely.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                            472
Appendixes                                         Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


       We agree that forcing such “overloading” is unacceptable. In fact, we would argue that the
semantics of assignment to THE_A in particular are (for good reasons) prescribed by our model and
must not be “overloaded” in the manner suggested. And even if those semantics were not
prescribed by the model, we would still argue that (a) changing the semantics of an operator in
arbitrary ways is a bad idea in general, and (b) changing the semantics of an operator in such a way
as to cause arbitrary side effects is an even worse one; it is a good general principle to insist that
operators have exactly the requested effect, no more and no less.1 Furthermore, we observe that the
option of changing the semantics in the manner suggested is not always available, anyway. For
example, let type ELLIPSE have another immediate subtype NONCIRCLE, with the obvious
semantics; let the constraint a > b apply to noncircles; and consider an assignment to THE_A for a
noncircle that, if accepted, would set a equal to b. What would be an appropriate “overloading” for
that assignment? Exactly what side effect would be appropriate?
       On the face of it, then, the conclusion of reference [111] that type constraints should be
rejected does seem inescapable. But observe the following implications of adopting that position:

    ■    As already explained, assignment to THE_A is not reimplemented (“overloaded”) for circles.

    ■    The fact that the current value of E in the example is a circle does not cause the assignment to
         THE_A to fail.

    ■    The result is thus that after that assignment, variable E contains a “noncircular circle”—that
         is, it contains a value of type CIRCLE for which a > b. (The type is still CIRCLE because,
         according to reference [111], we have done nothing to change it.)

    ■    Even worse, the fact that assignment to THE_A is supported (without any type checking) for
         a variable of declared type ELLIPSE but current most specific type CIRCLE strongly
         suggests that assignment to THE_A should be supported (again without any type checking)
         for a variable of declared type CIRCLE.

    ■    So let C be such a variable. After such an assignment, then, variable C will (in general)
         contain a “noncircular circle”—that is, a value of type CIRCLE for which a > b.

    ■    So the constraint a = b is not being enforced for type CIRCLE, and there is therefore no point
         in even stating it.

    ■    More generally, type constraints cannot be enforced—and therefore are not worth even
         stating—even if inheritance is currently not supported at all, just in case such support
         might be added at some future time.

      To us, these implications, the last one in particular, seem even more unacceptable than the
option of “forcing overloading.” (We note in passing, however, that SQL behaves in exactly the
manner just outlined! See Appendix H.)



1
    In fact it might be regarded as a strong form of The Assignment Principle.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                             473
Appendixes                               Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


      So what is to be done? Well, let us step back a moment and take stock. It seems to us that the
system should indeed support all of the four features (substitutability, static type checking,
mutability, and type constraints). More precisely, it seems to us that:

 ■   The system should support The Principle of Value Substitutability 100 percent.

 ■   The system should support static type checking to the maximum extent possible (the only
     place where run-time type checking is needed is in the context of TREAT).

 ■   The system should support mutability—meaning not only that it should support assignment
     per se, but also that it should support component-level update operators as a shorthand.

 ■   The system should support type constraints—meaning it should be aware of the fact that
     circles are subject to the constraint that a = b, and meaning further that assignment to
     THE_A(C) fails at compile time if the declared type of C is CIRCLE.

 ■   But the system should additionally support S by C and G by C! In particular, if the declared
     type of E is ELLIPSE, then it should always permit assignment to THE_A(E), and it should
     be prepared for MST(E) to change on such an assignment, either “down” from ELLIPSE to
     CIRCLE (“S by C”) or “up” from CIRCLE to ELLIPSE (“G by C”), as and when appropriate.

     In other words, S by C and G by C are the solution to “the 3 out of 4 problem.” In fact, we
now see that the 3 out of 4 “rule” is not really a rule at all, so long as S by C and G by C are
supported—as we claim they should be.


WHAT DOES INHERITANCE REALLY MEAN?

We are now in a position to take care of a piece of business that we tacitly (but of course
deliberately) left unfinished in Chapter 14. Recall IM Prescription 19 (“Update Operator
Inheritance and Variable Substitutability”), which states among other things that update operators
are inherited only conditionally; thus, for example, assignment to THE_A is not inherited by type
CIRCLE, as we saw at the end of the previous section. But this position raises a major issue—
namely, what does inheritance really mean? Does a sensible model even exist? If assignment to
THE_A does not apply to variables of type CIRCLE, is it reasonable to regard type CIRCLE as a
subtype of type ELLIPSE? After all, to say that type CIRCLE is a subtype of type ELLIPSE means
that all operators that apply to type ELLIPSE apply to type CIRCLE too, does it not?
       Well, no, it does not. To repeat from Chapter 12:

     [It] is important in this context—as in all others!—to distinguish very carefully between
     values and variables. When we say that every circle is an ellipse, what we mean, more
     precisely, is that every circle value is an ellipse value. We certainly do not mean that every
     circle variable is an ellipse variable: i.e., that a variable of declared type CIRCLE is a
     variable of declared type ELLIPSE, and hence can contain a value that is an ellipse and not a
     circle. In other words ... inheritance applies to values, not variables.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     474
Appendixes                                 Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


      Thus, it seems to us that the key to the problem is to recognize

 ■    The logical difference between values and variables, and hence

 ■    The logical difference between read-only and update operators, and hence

 ■    The logical difference between The Principle of Value Substitutability and The Principle of
      Variable Substitutability

(and, of course, to act appropriately upon such recognition).
       It further seems to us that the positions argued in references [111] and [137] (and a host of
similar writings) stem from a failure to make these crucial distinctions. And it seems still further
that such failures are at least partly responsible for the lack of consensus, noted several times earlier
in this book, on a formal, rigorous, and abstract inheritance model. For example:

 ■    Reference [2] states that “[there] are at least four types of inheritance: substitution inheritance,
      inclusion inheritance, constraint inheritance, and specialization inheritance ... Various degrees
      of these four types of inheritance are provided by existing systems and prototypes, and we do
      not prescribe a specific style of inheritance.”

 ■    Reference [19] states that “[inheritance can be] based on [a variety of] different criteria and
      there is no commonly accepted standard definition”—and proceeds to give eight (!) possible
      interpretations. (Reference [118] gives twelve.)

 ■    Reference [4] states that “[a given language merely] provides a set of [inheritance]
      mechanisms. While these mechanisms certainly restrict what one can do in that language and
      what views of inheritance can be implemented [in that language], they do not by themselves
      validate some view of inheritance or other. [Types,] specializations, generalizations, and
      inheritance are only concepts, and ... they do not have a universal objective meaning ... This
      [fact] implies that how inheritance is to be incorporated into a specific system is up to the
      designers of [that] system, and it constitutes a policy decision that must be implemented with
      the available mechanisms.” In other words, there simply is no model.
           It is, however, relevant to mention that the authors of reference [4] draw their conclusion
      after analysis of an example that is essentially isomorphic to the example discussed in the
      previous section of assignment to THE_A for a variable of declared type ELLIPSE but
      current most specific type CIRCLE—and their analysis is essentially isomorphic to that of
      reference [111], too. For such reasons, we reject their conclusion.

       Our own position, by contrast, is as follows: We do believe there is such a thing as a good
inheritance model; we believe further that any such model must pay careful attention to the logical
differences (values vs. variables and the rest) articulated in this book; and we believe still further
that any such model must support S by C and G by C. And yes, we do believe a circle is an
ellipse!—see the section immediately following.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          475
Appendixes                                      Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


BENEFITS OF S BY C

We have seen that one advantage of S by C and G by C is that they solve the 3 out of 4 “problem.”
But there are, of course, many other advantages that accrue from S by C and G by C, and those
advantages are the principal subject of this section.
      First, however, we should see whether there are any disadvantages. The obvious one is as
follows. Recall from Chapter 14 that S by C has the fundamental consequence that—at least as far
as the model is concerned—a selector invocation might return a value of some proper subtype of the
designated target type; for example, the selector invocation
         ELLIPSE ( LENGTH (...), LENGTH (...), POINT (...) )

will return a value of type CIRCLE, not ELLIPSE, if the two LENGTH invocations happen to
return the same value. As explained in Chapter 14, it follows that—at least conceptually—S by C
must be implemented inside selector implementation code. Note carefully, however, that we say “at
least conceptually.” In fact, we will argue in the section “Implementation Considerations,” later in
this appendix, that it is not actually necessary to compute the most specific type of the result of a
selector invocation—at least, not at the time of that invocation. For the record, however, we
consider in the paragraph immediately following what would be involved if S by C did indeed have
to be implemented inside selector implementation code.
       Assume for the moment, therefore, that the implementation does have to determine the most
specific type of the result of a selector invocation as soon as that result is computed. Every time we
define a new proper subtype T', then, the selector(s) for the immediate supertype(s) T of T' will need
to be reimplemented, or at least revised, because they might now return values of that new type T'
as their most specific type. But those revisions can clearly be automated! In the case of ellipses
and circles, for example, the system knows exactly when an ellipse is in fact a circle, and
furthermore it knows exactly which circle the ellipse in question is. (Note in particular, therefore,
that what we do not have to do—contrary to the claim, noted two sections back, in reference
[111]—is “redefine every [operator] provided by the class libraries whenever [we] need to [define a
subtype].”) In other words, the possible need to revise certain selectors (which, we stress, is the
only disadvantage to the S by C idea as far as we can see) is perhaps a minor burden on the system,
but it is no burden at all on any human user.1
       Now we turn to the advantages. We have numbered the points that follow for convenience.

    1.   The first is simply the overriding point that S by C obviously means the model is a better
         model of reality. As we put it in Chapter 14, “the more knowledge the system has, the better”
         is always a good general principle.

    2.   It is a direct consequence of S by C that values of most specific type ELLIPSE correspond to
         ellipses that are definitely not circles in the real world. In other models—including the
         original version of our own [82]—values of most specific type ELLIPSE can have a = b and
         can thus correspond to circles in the real world. Hence, defining CIRCLE as a subtype of

1
  Not even a performance burden, in our opinion. Again, see the section “Implementation Considerations,” later in this
appendix.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       476
Appendixes                                Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


      ELLIPSE in such a model partitions the set of ellipses, not into circles vs. noncircles, but
      rather into circles vs. “maybe-circles”—intuitively not a very satisfactory state of affairs.

 3.   It is also a direct consequence of S by C that values of most specific type CIRCLE correspond
      to ellipses that are definitely circles in the real world. In other words, “noncircular circles”
      and similar nonsenses cannot occur. (Nor could they in our previous model, but for a
      different reason. More to the point, perhaps, they can occur in SQL, as already noted, since
      SQL does not support type constraints. See Appendix H.)

 4.   More compile-time type checking can be done and fewer run-time type errors can occur; in
      fact, run-time type errors can occur solely on an attempt to TREAT a value as being of a type
      it does not possess. (In our original model, by contrast, additional run-time type errors could
      occur—for example, on an attempt to assign to THE_A of a variable of declared type
      ELLIPSE but current most specific type CIRCLE.)

 5.   Assignments are logically simpler (especially assignments to THE_ pseudovariables, which in
      our original model involved a complicated CASE expression on the right side in their
      expansion). In particular, changing types “up” or “down” is easy. That is, given variable E of
      declared type ELLIPSE, in order to change the most specific type of E from ELLIPSE to
      CIRCLE or the other way around, it is sufficient just to update E appropriately.

 6.   Changing types “sideways” is also easy. That is, given (say) types ELLIPSE, CIRCLE, and
      NONCIRCLE, in order to change the most specific type of variable E (of declared type
      ELLIPSE) from CIRCLE to NONCIRCLE or the other way around, it is sufficient just to
      update E appropriately. (In our original model, by contrast, changing types “sideways” in
      such a manner was a considerably more complex process, involving a “TREAT UP”
      operation on E—see Points 7 and 8 below—to force it to be “just an ellipse” first, followed by
      an assignment with a complicated CASE expression on its right side second. What is more,
      the overall process did not work properly anyway if ELLIPSE was a union type, as in fact it is
      in the example. All of these complications go away with S by C.)

 7.   Equality comparisons are easy. For example, given our usual variables E and C of declared
      types ELLIPSE and CIRCLE, respectively, we can test them for equality as follows:
      E = C

      In our original model, by contrast, we would have had to have written something like this:
      TREAT_UP_AS_ELLIPSE ( E ) = TREAT_UP_AS_ELLIPSE ( C )

      (This expression can be read as “treat both comparands as just ellipses and then compare the
      two ellipses.”)

 8.   In fact, the TREAT UP operator, which as we have seen was included in our original model
      for a variety of reasons, is completely unnecessary with S by C and G by C, and so can be
      dropped. (Actually it was only shorthand anyway, but any simplification is generally to be




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           477
Appendixes                                 Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


      desired.) Note: Perhaps we should point out that our model does still support “treating up” as
      well as “treating down,” but only in a harmless kind of way. Given our usual variable C, for
      example, the expression TREAT_AS_ELLIPSE(C) is valid, but it can never fail; in fact, it is a
      “no op.”

 9.   With S by C and G by C, the rules regarding conditional inheritance of update operators apply
      to declared types. In our original model, by contrast, they applied to most specific types
      instead, a fact that made them harder to understand and harder to implement and led to more
      run-time type checking and more run-time type errors.

10.   More code reuse is achievable, and programs are more immune to the introduction of new
      subtypes. For example, a program that assigns to THE_A(E) will still work after type
      CIRCLE is introduced (as it might not have done under our original model).

11.   There is never any logical need to CAST—i.e., convert—a value of type ELLIPSE to type
      CIRCLE, because an ellipse that can be “converted to” type CIRCLE will in fact be of type
      CIRCLE already, under S by C. The operator itself thus becomes unnecessary (as it was not,
      under our previous model).

12.   S by C can also have the effect of making certain implementation versions of certain operators
      logically unnecessary. For example, the update version of MOVE discussed in Chapter 14 for
      ellipses and rectangles will work for any combination of most specific argument types—
      ELLIPSE or CIRCLE for the first argument and RECTANGLE or SQUARE for the second
      argument—whereas such was not the case with our original model.

      In fact, we would now like to go further and argue that S by C is the only conceptually valid
way of defining subtypes!—so long as the supertype is a regular type, at any rate (S by C from a
dummy type makes no sense). We justify this strong claim as follows. Let type T' be a subtype of
(regular) type T. Then:

 ■    T and T' are both sets (sets of values), and T' is a subset of T.

 ■    Therefore T and T' both have membership predicates—predicates, that is, such that a given
      value is of the type in question if and only if it satisfies the corresponding predicate. Let those
      predicates be P and P', respectively.

 ■    Since we are dealing with finite sets only, we can for simplicity regard predicates P and P' as
      effectively just enumerating the values of types T and T', respectively.

 ■    Note in particular that since every value of type T' is also a value of type T, predicate P' can
      be formulated in terms of values of type T (not T') only.

 ■    And that predicate P', formulated in terms of values of type T, is precisely the constraint that
      values of type T have to satisfy in order to be values of type T'. In other words, a value of
      type T is specialized to type T' precisely if it satisfies the constraint P'. Note: P' is what IM




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         478
Appendixes                                          Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


         Prescription 10 calls the specialization constraint for T'. In Tutorial D, it is specified by
         means of an <is def> on the definition of that type T'.

Thus, to repeat, we see S by C as the only conceptually valid way of defining subtypes. In
particular, therefore (see reference [71] for a detailed discussion of this particular issue), our answer
to the notorious question “Is a circle an ellipse?” is a very firm yes.

WHAT ABOUT OBJECTS?

We have now laid sufficient groundwork to be able to explain a claim we made in Chapter 9, in our
discussion of OO Proscription 2 (“No Object IDs”). The claim in question was basically this:
Object IDs undermine inheritance. (What we actually said was that “pointers ... can lead to a
serious problem if type inheritance is also supported.”) In this section, we take a closer look at this
issue.
       First of all, we remind you that (unlike D) object languages make heavy use of object IDs, or
in other words pointers, and variables in such languages typically contain such pointers instead of
regular nonpointer values. Thus, for example, the analog of our usual variables E and C in such a
language would typically be variables—call them XE and XC—that contain pointers to ellipses and
circles instead of ellipses and circles as such. Furthermore, when we say pointers to ellipses and
circles, we really mean pointers to ellipse and circle variables,1 because by definition it is variables,
not values, that have addresses.
       Next, we remind you from Chapter 9 that languages that support pointers also typically
support two operators called referencing and dereferencing, respectively:

    ■    Referencing: Given a variable V, the referencing operator applied to V returns a pointer to V.

    ■    Dereferencing: Given a variable P of type pointer, the dereferencing operator applied to P
         returns the variable that P currently points to.

     Note: Referencing and dereferencing operations are often implicit in practice. However, we
show them explicitly in the examples that follow, because we have found that implicitness in this
context can unnecessarily obscure some of the points we want to make.
     With these preliminaries out of the way, we now present our first code fragment:
         VAR E ELLIPSE ;
         VAR XE PTR_TO_ELLIPSE ;

         E := CIRCLE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) ) ;
         XE := PTR_TO ( E ) ;

         Explanation: We are making use of two hypothetical extensions to Tutorial D:




1
    Object languages would say they are pointers to ellipse and circle objects.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              479
Appendixes                                        Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


    ■   First, if T is a type, then PTR_TO_T is a type too, and its values are pointers to, or object IDs
        of, variables of type T. In other words, PTR_TO_ is a type generator (a scalar type generator,
        in fact).

    ■   Second, if V is a variable of type T, then the operator invocation PTR_TO (V) returns a
        pointer to V. In other words, PTR_TO is the referencing operator mentioned above.

     The effect of the code fragment is thus (a) to set the variable E to contain a circle of radius
five—note the appeal to substitutability—and (b) to set the variable XE to contain a pointer to E.
     Now we introduce another variable:
        VAR XC PTR_TO_CIRCLE ;

       We assume that—as is in fact typically the case in object languages—type PTR_TO_CIRCLE
is a proper subtype of type PTR_TO_ELLIPSE. Thus, we can legitimately perform the following
assignment:
        XC := TREAT_AS_PTR_TO_CIRCLE ( XE ) ;

        Now XC also contains a pointer to E—in fact, it contains the same pointer value as XE does.
        Finally, we attempt the following assignment (let us call it Assignment Z):
        THE_A ( DEREF ( XE ) ) := LENGTH ( 6.0 ) ;

      Explanation: We are assuming the existence of a dereferencing operator, DEREF, which
takes a variable of some pointer type and returns the variable that pointer variable currently points
to. (In the example, we are actually using DEREF as a pseudovariable,1 since it appears on the left
side of the assignment.) Thus, the intent of Assignment Z is, loosely speaking, to update the length
of the a semiaxis of the ellipse variable that XE currently points to, setting it to six. So what
happens?
      Well, it seems there are three possibilities, all of them bad. We consider each in turn.

    ■   Case 1: Assignment Z fails on a run-time type error, because MST(E) is CIRCLE and
        assignment to THE_A is not supported for type CIRCLE. In this case, the model is bad
        because (a) it leads to run-time type errors in a context other than TREAT, and (b) more
        important, it does not support G by C, and so is not “a good model of reality.”

    ■   Case 2: Assignment Z “succeeds” (i.e., there is no run-time type error and the update is
        done), but G by C does not occur. In this case, the model is bad because (a) it fails to
        support G by C (and so is not “a good model of reality”); (b) variable XC now points to a
        “noncircular circle”; (c) more generally, type constraints cannot be supported. (As pointed
        out earlier, this case corresponds to the way SQL works.)

1
  This observation is not strictly accurate, because the overall assignment is not just shorthand for something else. In
other words, support for pointers implies that we need to extend our definition (both syntactic and semantic) of the
assignment operator. We omit the details here, since the whole aim of the discussion is to bolster the argument that
pointers should not be supported in the first place.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           480
Appendixes                                 Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


 ■    Case 3: Assignment Z “succeeds” (i.e., there is no run-time type error and the update is
      done), and G by C does occur. In this case, the model is bad because (a) variable XC, of
      declared type PTR_TO_CIRCLE, now points to a variable of current most specific type
      ELLIPSE, and hence (b) type constraints cannot be supported. Note: In practice, this option
      is probably a nonstarter, precisely because of point (a); thus, G by C probably does not occur,
      and we are back with Case 2.

       Conclusion: Whichever option we choose, the model is bad. And the culprit (in this
particular example) is the concept of “shared variables”: Pointer variables XE and XC “share” the
ellipse variable E. Furthermore, it is pointers (i.e., object IDs) that permit that sharing in the first
place. It follows that object IDs—at least if they permit shared variables—and a good model of
inheritance are incompatible.
       As a matter of fact, we do not even need to invoke the concept of shared variables in order to
illustrate the problem. Consider the following simpler version of the example:
      VAR E ELLIPSE ;
      VAR XC PTR_TO_CIRCLE ;

      E := CIRCLE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) ) ;
      XC := TREAT_AS_PTR_TO_CIRCLE ( PTR_TO ( E ) ) ;
      THE_A ( E ) := LENGTH ( 6.0 ) ;

       Explanation: The first assignment sets E to contain a circle of radius five. The second sets
XC to point to E. The third (“Assignment Z”) attempts to update the length of the a semiaxis of the
ellipse variable E to six. What happens? Without going into details, it should be clear that there are
the same three possibilities as before, again all bad, and the overall conclusion is the same as before
as well: Object IDs and a good model of inheritance are incompatible.
       For a third and final example, we consider the following still simpler code fragment:
      VAR C CIRCLE ;
      VAR XE PTR_TO_ELLIPSE ;

      C := CIRCLE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) ) ;
      XE := PTR_TO ( C ) ;
      THE_A ( DEREF ( XE ) ) := LENGTH ( 6.0 ) ;

       Here S by C and G by C have no part to play (variable C can never have most specific type
ELLIPSE), but the final assignment still either raises a run-time type error or produces a noncircular
circle. Once again, therefore, we conclude that object IDs and a good model of inheritance are
incompatible.
       We conjecture that the foregoing conclusion goes some way toward explaining why (so far as
we know) there have been no good inheritance models in the past. To be specific, all of the prior
work on inheritance that we are aware of has been done in an object setting specifically, and the
object world generally seems to take it as a sine qua non that object IDs must be supported. As we
have now seen, however, object IDs imply that the model must be bad. In other words, (a) objects
imply object IDs; (b) object IDs and a good model of inheritance are incompatible; (c) hence,
objects per se and a good model of inheritance are incompatible!




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          481
Appendixes                                 Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


      What is more, since it is clearly an assumption underlying the claims of reference [137]
regarding “the 3 out of 4 rule” that object support is a desideratum, it is tempting to suggest that we
should really have been talking all along about “a 4 out of 5 rule” instead, where the fifth element—
and clearly the one to be discarded—was objects themselves.
      One last point on this topic: Nothing we have said in this section has anything to do with
databases specifically. In other words, the problems we have been discussing apply equally well to
the use of pointers or object IDs for purely local data as well as for database data per se. (This
observation does not necessarily mean there should be no pointer support in the nondatabase
portions of D, but it does mean that such support, if it exists, should be treated with all due caution.)

Why the Problems Do Not Arise with Foreign Keys

It is interesting to observe that problems analogous to those we have been discussing do not arise
with foreign keys (which are sometimes claimed to be the relational world’s counterpart to pointers
or object IDs). By way of illustration, consider this example once again (the second of those
previously discussed):
      VAR E ELLIPSE ;
      VAR XC PTR_TO_CIRCLE ;

      E := CIRCLE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) ) ;
      XC := TREAT_AS_PTR_TO_CIRCLE ( PTR_TO ( E ) ) ;
      THE_A ( E ) := LENGTH ( 6.0 ) ;

     Ignoring irrelevancies, a relational analog of this example might involve relvars looking
something like this:
      VAR R1 ... RELATION { K ELLIPSE ... } KEY { K } ;

      VAR R2 ... RELATION { K CIRCLE ... } FOREIGN KEY { K } REFERENCES R1 ;

       For simplicity, we assume no referential actions—cascade update, etc.—are specified (this
simplifying assumption does not materially affect the argument in any way). Both relvars are
initially empty.
       Observe now that every value of K in relvar R1 that “matches” some value of K in relvar R2
must be of type CIRCLE, not just of type ELLIPSE. So let us insert a tuple into each of the two
relvars:
      INSERT R1 ... TUPLE { K CIRCLE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) ) } ... ;

      INSERT R2 ... TUPLE { K CIRCLE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) ) } ... ;

      Finally, let us try to “update the tuple” in R1:
      UPDATE R1 WHERE K = CIRCLE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) )
              ( THE_A ( K ) := LENGTH ( 6.0 ) ) ;

      This UPDATE attempts to “G by C” the circle in the single tuple in R1 to type ELLIPSE.
That attempt fails, however (and the overall UPDATE fails), on a referential integrity violation. So




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          482
Appendixes                                          Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


we do get a run-time error. But the error in question is a run-time integrity violation, not a run-time
type error (run-time integrity violations are always possible, of course). What we do not get is a
noncircular circle, nor a failure of G by C. Overall, in fact, we have a system in which noncircular
circles cannot occur, type constraints can be supported, and in particular S by C and G by C are
supported too.


IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS

As we have seen, S by C (including G by C) is an area in which our inheritance model differs
significantly from that usually found in object languages. The following quote from a paper by
Rumbaugh [123] illustrates the point:

        Is SQUARE a subclass of RECTANGLE? ... Stretching the x-dimension of a rectangle is a perfectly reasonable
        thing to do. But if you do it to a square, then the object is no longer a square. This is not necessarily a bad thing
        conceptually. When you stretch a square you do get a rectangle ... But ... most object-oriented languages do not
        want objects to change class ... [This] suggests [a] design principle for classification systems: A subclass should
        not be defined by constraining a superclass.

        Observe that Rumbaugh’s conclusion—i.e., his “design principle for classification
systems”—is the diametric opposite of our own, which is that S by C is the only conceptually valid
way of defining a subclass (or subtype, in our terms). Note too, however, that Rumbaugh takes the
position he does, at least in part, because “[object] languages do not want objects to change class.”
Our own model, by contrast, was deliberately not constrained by existing languages or
implementations;1 we wanted to define the abstract model first and leave implementation concerns
till later. In particular, as explained earlier in this appendix, we included S by C in that model
because we think it is useful. But we would certainly remove it if it turned out to be impossible to
implement or impossible to implement efficiently.
        So can S by C be implemented efficiently? Well, it is relevant to observe that Rumbaugh
buttresses his conclusion with the following claim:

        It would be computationally infeasible to support a rule-based, intensional definition of class membership,
        because you would have to check the rules after each operation that affects an object.

(The phrase “rule-based, intensional definition of class membership” refers to S by C and G by C; it
means, for example, that a given ellipse is a member of the class of circles if it satisfies the rule that
a = b.)
      However, we reject the foregoing claim; we believe the computational aspects of S by C can
be handled both simply and efficiently. To be more specific, we reject both (a) the suggestion that
S by C is “computationally infeasible” (i.e., that it imposes intolerable computational overhead) and
(b) the suggestion that the most specific type has to be (re)computed “after each operation that
affects an object.” We now proceed to elaborate on these points.
      Let X be an expression. Then the first and most important point is that it is never necessary to
compute the current most specific type MST(X), as such, of that expression X; it is necessary only to

1
    Though the original version was!




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             483
Appendixes                                Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


determine in certain contexts whether the current value v(X) of X is of some particular type—to be
more precise, whether it is of some specific proper subtype of the declared type DT(X) of X. By
way of example, consider the simple type graph shown in Fig. F.1 (a repeat of Fig. 15.1). Let
DT(X) and MST(X) be PARALLELOGRAM and SQUARE, respectively, and consider the
expression TREAT_AS_RECTANGLE(X). In order to evaluate that expression, we clearly do not
need to compute MST(X)—all we need to do is ascertain whether X is indeed of type
RECTANGLE.
╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                        ┌───────────────┐                        ║
║                        │ PARALLELOGRAM │                        ║
║                        └───────┬───────┘                        ║
║                 ┌──────────────┴──────────────┐                 ║
║          ┌─────────────┐                ┌─────────────┐         ║
║          │ RECTANGLE │                  │   RHOMBUS   │         ║
║          └──────┬──────┘                └──────┬──────┘         ║
║                 └──────────────┬──────────────┘                 ║
║                         ┌─────────────┐                         ║
║                         │   SQUARE    │                         ║
║                         └─────────────┘                         ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. F.1: A simple type graph

     Next, we observe that the remarks of the foregoing paragraph apply if X is a selector
invocation in particular. To revert for a moment to our usual example of ellipses and circles: As
we know, the selector invocation
      ELLIPSE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) )

is defined by the model to return a value of most specific type CIRCLE, not ELLIPSE (“in other
words, S by C occurs,” as we put it in Chapter 14 when we first discussed this example). But there
is no need for the implementation to perform S by C as such at this time; to repeat, all it has to do is
be able to ascertain subsequently that the value in question is indeed a circle, if and when some
operation—e.g., TREAT_AS_CIRCLE(X)—is executed that depends in some way on that fact.
       As the basis for a more searching discussion, we return to the type graph of Fig. F.1. Suppose
again that DT(X) is PARALLELOGRAM and we need to determine whether v(X) is of type
SQUARE. Now, there are two paths in the graph from PARALLELOGRAM to SQUARE, via
RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS respectively, and the system needs to choose one in order to make
that determination. Suppose it chooses the one via RHOMBUS. If v(X) fails to satisfy the
constraint for RHOMBUS, then it is certainly not of type SQUARE; but if it does satisfy the
constraint for RHOMBUS, then it needs to be tested against the constraint for SQUARE. On the
face of it, therefore, it seems that no more than two nodes of the graph need be visited in order to
discover whether v(X) is a square: two if it is a rhombus, otherwise just one.
       Recall from Chapter 15, however, that the type constraint for type SQUARE takes the form:
      IS { RECTANGLE, RHOMBUS }

(we omit the POSSREP specification for simplicity). Thus, it looks as if it might be necessary to
traverse the path from PARALLELOGRAM to RECTANGLE as well as the one from




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         484
Appendixes                                       Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


PARALLELOGRAM to RHOMBUS, in order to determine whether v(X) is of type RECTANGLE
as well as of type RHOMBUS. However, we can avoid this apparent need to visit additional nodes
by labeling the arc from RHOMBUS to SQUARE with the constraint that determines whether a
given parallelogram is a rectangle.1 Then, if the implementation discovers that v(X) is a rhombus, it
can immediately check to see whether it is a rectangle (and hence a square) too, without having to
visit any additional nodes.
       Here then is an algorithm (“TEST_T”), embodying the foregoing ideas, for determining
whether some specified value v of some known type t is of some specified type s:
        OPERATOR TEST_T ( v value, t type, s type ) RETURNS BOOLEAN ;
            IF t = s
                THEN RETURN TRUE ;
                ELSE
                    BEGIN ;
                        let t' be some immediate subtype of t
                             that is also a supertype of s ;
                        let IC be the specialization constraint
                             on the arc from t to t' ;
                        IF v satisfies IC
                            THEN RETURN ( TEST_T ( v, t', s ) ) ;
                            ELSE RETURN FALSE ;
                        END IF ;
                    END ;
            END IF ;
        END OPERATOR ;

      It should be clear that this algorithm of itself is certainly “computationally feasible” and does
not impose intolerable overhead. Of course, we do need to consider how often it needs to be
invoked; in particular, we need to consider whether it is invoked so frequently that those
invocations do constitute an excessive performance burden. We will return to these matters at the
end of this section. First, however, we need to pin down the contexts in which TEST_T needs to be
invoked. Careful consideration of the inheritance model described in this book reveals that there
are precisely three such contexts:

    ■   TREAT: The expression TREAT_AS_T(X), where T is a proper subtype of DT(X), is
        evaluated by raising an exception if TEST_T(X,DT(X),T) returns FALSE.

    ■   Type testing: The expression IS_T(X), where T is a proper subtype of DT(X), is logically
        equivalent to TEST_T(X,DT(X),T).

    ■   Operator version selection (“binding”): As explained under IM Prescription 17, operators
        are allowed to have several implementation versions, each with a different version signature;
        moreover, the system is generally expected to “bind” a given invocation, somehow, to the
        version whose signature best matches the corresponding invocation signature—though as
        noted in Chapter 14 there is actually no requirement in the model per se that it do so. Let Op

1
  If there were any intervening nodes between PARALLELOGRAM and RECTANGLE, the constraint in question
would have to be the conjunction of all constraints on the path from PARALLELOGRAM to RECTANGLE. And if
there were more than one such path, the system would have to choose one, just as it had to choose whether to follow the
RECTANGLE or RHOMBUS path to SQUARE in our earlier discussion.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       485
Appendixes                                       Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


       be an operator, then, and let OpI be some invocation of Op. If the most specific types of all
       arguments to OpI are known, then the binding problem reduces to one that has already been
       solved in existing languages. However, determining those most specific types under S by C
       clearly does involve overhead, so let us concentrate for the moment on the argument declared
       types instead (which are certainly known). If any of those types is a proper subtype of its
       corresponding parameter, and an implementation version for that proper subtype is available,
       then at least part of the binding process can be done at compile time. At run time, the system
       will need to know which implementation versions are available to suit the declared types of
       the arguments. If there are several such, and at least one has a parameter whose declared type
       is a proper subtype of that of the corresponding argument, then the system does have some
       type testing to do (i.e., it does need to invoke TEST_T at run time). We will have a little more
       to say in connection with this point in the very last sentence of this appendix.

       We claim there is nothing else in our inheritance model that requires TEST_T to be invoked at
run time.1 In particular, equality comparisons do not require it. To be more specific, it is sufficient
in order to evaluate the comparison X = Y (a) to determine the most specific common supertype of
DT(X) and DT(Y) (which can be done at compile time) and then (b) to invoke the “=“ operator for
that common supertype. (Actually, any common supertype that is not a dummy type can be chosen
for this purpose.)
       We offer one further argument to justify our claim that S by C does not entail excessive
overhead: Whenever the assignment X := Y is executed, either explicitly or implicitly, the system
knows the declared type of Y and can thus flag X internally as being of that type. Such a flag could
allow subsequent invocations of TEST_T on X to be performed on a smaller portion of the type
graph, or even to be eliminated entirely in some cases. In the same kind of way, whenever X is
specified as an argument to some operator invocation that requires run-time examination of the
types of its arguments, the system can take the opportunity to “remember” any types it discovers.
       We turn now to the suggestion that the most specific type has to be (re)computed “after each
operation that affects an object.” In fact, of course, we have already seen that there is no need to
compute the most specific type, as such, at all. In particular, if variable V is updated by some
invocation of some update operator, there is no need to determine MST(V) after that invocation (at
least, not at the time of the invocation). All we need is to be able to determine subsequently
whether V is of some specified type—and we have already discussed that requirement at length.
       Finally, we return as promised to the issue of how often TEST_T needs to be invoked and
consider whether those invocations might constitute a serious performance burden. Suppose the
system did not support inheritance and S by C at all, and suppose we have a user-defined type
POLYGON. Then there are two possibilities—(a) we might want, on certain occasions, to execute
different code depending on whether a given polygon is in fact a rectangle or “just a polygon,” or
(b) we might not. For example, suppose we want to implement an AREA operator for polygons.


1
  Observe in particular that—unlike SQL (see Appendix H)—our model prescribes no operator for testing whether a
given expression is of a given most specific type (see the remarks on this issue at the end of IM Prescription 15 in
Chapter 14). If such an operator were supported nonetheless, the algorithm FIND_MST given in Chapter 14 could be
used to implement it. In this connection, it is worth pointing out that FIND_MST does not necessarily entail visiting
every node between the declared type and most specific type of its operand.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        486
Appendixes                               Appendix F / A Closer Look at Specialization by Constraint


Then we might or might not want to check whether the argument to a given AREA invocation is in
fact a rectangle (and use the simple “height times width” formula when it is):

 ■   Suppose we do want to perform such a check. In effect, then, we will have to include our
     own implementation of the IS_RECTANGLE operator—in effect, of TEST_RECTANGLE—
     inside the AREA code. Clearly, support for inheritance with S by C would make our task a
     little easier in this case, because there would be no need for us to provide that implementation
     after all. Moreover, the effect on overall system performance is more or less the same either
     way; the main difference is just that the type checking is done by the system instead of the
     application, if S by C is supported.

 ■   By contrast, suppose we do not want to perform such a check. In this case, support for S by C
     (and TEST_T) would clearly impose no overhead at all, because the type checking would
     simply not be done.

      Analogous remarks apply to TREAT operations and the binding process (these being the other
areas requiring invocation of TEST_T, if S by C is supported). We consider the binding process
briefly. To continue with the AREA example, the question is: Would we include code in the
AREA implementation, not only to check whether the argument to a given AREA invocation is a
rectangle, but also to use the simple “height times width” formula when it is?

 ■   Suppose we would include such code. In effect, then, we will be providing two separate
     versions of the AREA operator bundled together within the AREA implementation, as well as
     code to perform the run-time binding process. Again, direct support for inheritance with S by
     C would surely make our task a little easier, and the effect on overall system performance will
     be more or less the same either way.

 ■   By contrast, suppose we would not include such code. In that case, support for S by C clearly
     imposes no overhead at all.

      In conclusion, it is worth pointing out that (as the foregoing discussion suggests) what
overhead S by C does impose is a function of the number of different implementation versions
provided, not a function of the number of subtypes and constraints involved.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      487