                                          Appendix H

                           A Comparison with SQL

Naturally we believe the ideas of The Third Manifesto are valuable in and of themselves. However,
we also believe they can be useful as a yardstick or framework—i.e., as a basis against which (as
noted in Chapter 1) alternative proposals, and indeed concrete implementations, can be carefully
analyzed, criticized, evaluated, and perhaps judged. In this appendix, we use that framework to
examine the SQL standard [99] in particular. Please note immediately, however, that we expressly
do not want our ideas to be used in connection with any kind of “checklist” evaluation (neither of
the SQL standard nor of anything else). We do think those ideas can serve as a convenient
framework for structuring discussions, but they are not meant to serve as a basis for some kind of
scoring scheme. We are not interested in scoring schemes.
       Back to the SQL standard per se. As the formal name “SQL:2003” suggests, the current
version of that standard was ratified in late 2003, when it replaced the previous version
(“SQL:1999”). It consists of a series of separate documents, called Parts; most of the material that
is relevant to this appendix is in Part 2, “SQL/Foundation” (see the annotation to reference [99] in
Appendix K for further discussion). In principle, SQL:2003 includes the whole of SQL:1999—with
a few comparatively minor exceptions—as a proper subset. In this appendix, however, we follow
the usual convention of using the formal name “SQL:2003” only when we want to emphasize the
point that we are discussing some aspect of the language that was not present in SQL:1999.
Elsewhere, we adopt the convention that the unqualified name “SQL” refers to SQL:2003, the most
recent version, specifically (where it makes any difference).
       Before going any further, we need to acknowledge the fact that one of the present authors was
actively involved in the production of SQL standards for several years (from 1988 to 2004, to be
precise). Therefore—just in case any reader, possibly seeing some conflict of interest in that
involvement, might think of raising an eyebrow at some of the stark differences to be observed
between the SQL standard and our Manifesto—we would like to take a moment to point out some
of the ways in which we as independent manifesto writers enjoy certain freedoms that SQL
standardizers do not:

 ■   First and foremost, we do not have to deal with The Shackle of Compatibility [27]. SQL
     standardizers at large might very well share our regrets over (e.g.) nulls and duplicate rows,
     but they are powerless to remove them from the standard, just as vendors are powerless to
     remove them from products already shipped and perhaps widely used.

 ■   Second, the design and implementation of established products might have an adverse effect
     on the feasibility and cost-effectiveness of proposed SQL extensions.

 ■   Third, an SQL standardizer whose participation is funded by an employer, say, might
     sometimes feel obliged to place the commercial interests of that employer above his or her
     own personal opinions, should there be any conflict.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       506
Appendixes                                                                  Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


    ■   Fourth, an SQL standardizer has to make compromises within a large group of people with
        perhaps widely differing opinions and interests. By contrast, coauthors with closely shared
        opinions and interests have to make hardly any compromises at all, especially on matters
        considered by both to be very important.

       It follows from the foregoing that the criticisms that follow are definitely not intended as, nor
should they be taken as, criticisms of the individuals involved in the production of the SQL
standard. Nor do we necessarily mean to suggest that we think the SQL standard could and should
have been more closely aligned with The Third Manifesto. Indeed, it is our recognition of the
inevitability of misalignment that makes us advocate serious consideration of something that might
supersede SQL in the long term.
       Comparison format: The bulk of this appendix consists of a series of point-by-point
comparisons of pertinent features of SQL with the various prescriptions, proscriptions, and
suggestions from the body of the book. The comparisons are presented mostly as bald statements of
fact; for the most part, we do not restate opinions, give value judgments, or comment on the relative
severity of various points. Also, we use the terms conforms and fails, in boldface, to indicate our
general finding in connection with each point. Very often these terms have to be qualified, and
sometimes both are used in connection with the same point. For example, SQL sometimes
conforms to (say) a certain prescription in some respects but fails in others; sometimes it conforms
as far as it goes but does not go far enough; sometimes it conforms vacuously, because none of the
most widely used implementations actually includes the required feature; sometimes it fails not
because of specifics of the feature at hand, but rather because that feature depends on some other
feature on which it fails in turn. Such dependencies are appropriately indicated.
       We now proceed with our point-by-point comparisons.

RM PRESCRIPTIONS

1. Scalar types

SQL conforms, sort of. User-defined scalar types can be defined and destroyed by means of
appropriate CREATE TYPE and DROP TYPE statements (though there are some questions over
the extent to which such types are truly scalar—see the next paragraph). Built-in scalar types
(BOOLEAN, INTEGER, REAL, DECIMAL, CHARACTER, DATE, TIME, TIMESTAMP, XML,
etc.) are also supported, of course. Each such type is a named set of scalar values and is distinct
from all the rest.1 Values and variables of such types can be operated upon solely by means of the
operators defined for the type in question. (We remark in passing that SQL does not use the term
operator in the same generic way as the Manifesto does, but reserves it for built-in functions like
“+” and “-” that make use of some special notation—typically infix notation, though “+” and “-”
can also be used as monadic prefix operators.)



1
  Actually there is some confusion here. Certain pairs of built-in types—REAL and FLOAT, for example—seem to be
regarded as both distinct and not distinct, depending on context. If they are distinct, they are certainly not disjoint as
required by RM Prescription 1; if they are not distinct, they violate the requirement (again part of RM Prescription 1)
that two types that are really the same type must have the same name.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           507
Appendixes                                                                     Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


        Our reasons for saying “sort of” in the previous paragraph are as follows. First, user-defined
scalar types in SQL fall into two broad categories, “DISTINCT types” and “structured types.” As
explained under RM Very Strong Suggestion 8 in Chapter 10, DISTINCT types are limited to
having a representation that involves just one type, which must be built in (and hence scalar). By
contrast, structured types can have a representation involving any number of types, and those types
can be either built in or user defined (and they do not need to be scalar, either). What is more, there
is at least one context in which a structured type—which is a scalar type, by definition, and usually
behaves like one—nevertheless behaves as if it were not scalar: namely, when the type in question
is used as a basis for creating a table that is “of” that type.
        SQL also meets our requirement for operators whose purpose is to expose each declared
possible representation for a given type. For user-defined types, it requires exactly one
representation to be specified, and the implementation automatically provides appropriate operators
for each component of that representation. For built-in types, it provides appropriate literals.
        SQL fails in that it is possible for a user-defined type to have nothing corresponding to a
selector operator; that is, no such operators are provided automatically, though it is always possible
to provide a user-defined one to serve the purpose. It is true that certain operators are provided
automatically for user-defined types, including something called a constructor function. However,
every invocation of such a function always returns the same value (specified, explicitly or
implicitly, by the type definer). In other words, what such a function really does is allocate storage
and initialize it to contain the “value” whose every immediate component is the applicable
default1—it does not support the selection of an arbitrary value of that type, as RM Prescription 1
requires.
        SQL also fails in that it does not really meet our requirement for a built-in boolean type. To
be specific, its BOOLEAN type, which might have been thought to fit the bill, suffers from certain
anomalies arising from SQL’s idiosyncratic concept of nulls and its foundation in three-valued
logic. That type does include just the two values we prescribe, TRUE and FALSE—but we make
that prescription precisely because we require D to be based on two-valued logic! We would
naturally expect a language based on three-valued logic, as SQL is, to support three “boolean”
values (TRUE, FALSE, and UNKNOWN), not two. But SQL represents the UNKNOWN truth
value not by a value at all but by means of the SQL-style null. Null is not a value in SQL because it
does not have all the properties of values.2 In particular, it is not always treated as equal to itself
and unequal to everything else, though it is sometimes so treated.
        While we are on the subject of SQL’s BOOLEAN type, we should mention that it suffers
from certain further anomalies as well—anomalies that, while they might not violate RM
Prescription 1 per se, certainly do violate other prescriptions (RM Prescription 26 and OO
Prescription 6 in particular). For example, if B is a column of type BOOLEAN, a WHERE clause
of the form WHERE B is invalid; and if B happens to be empty, the aggregate operators EVERY
and ANY applied to B both return null (instead of the logically correct results, which are TRUE and
FALSE, respectively).


1
    We set “value” in quotes here because defaults are often defined to be null and null is not a value at all.
2
  There are major logical differences, in fact, (a) between nulls and values in general, and (b) between null and “the
third truth value”—i.e., UNKNOWN—in particular. See, e.g., reference [76] for further discussion.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                              508
Appendixes                                                                 Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


       In any case, SQL’s support for BOOLEAN is somewhat vacuous, because in most
implementations the type name is not available, as a consequence of which support for the type is
subject to severe restrictions. Such an implementation does support certain boolean expressions
(e.g., CITY = 'La Paz'), which can be used in certain contexts—for example, a constraint definition,
a CASE expression, or the WHERE clause of a query (as in any SQL system). However, such an
implementation does not permit BOOLEAN as such to be the explicit declared type of anything
(e.g., a column). Furthermore, in the case of columns in particular, it cannot be the implicit
declared type either, and so boolean expressions are not permitted as items in a SELECT clause.
Furthermore, the aggregate functions EVERY and ANY are typically not supported at all and thus
cannot even be invoked in a HAVING clause.
       SQL does not support empty types.

2. Scalar values are typed

SQL conforms (except for the possible overlap among certain built-in types noted under RM
Prescription 1).

3. Read-only vs. update operators

SQL conforms with respect to our prescribed user-defined update operator support, via its
CREATE PROCEDURE statement. It also conforms with respect to our prescribed user-defined
read-only operator support, in that the output parameters that can be declared in CREATE
PROCEDURE statements are prohibited in CREATE FUNCTION and CREATE METHOD
statements (though we note that—unlike our read-only operators—SQL functions and methods are
allowed to update the database, so long as their definition includes the option MODIFIES SQL
DATA). SQL also conforms to our prescription regarding the ability to destroy user-defined
operators, via certain DROP statements.

4. Physical vs. possible representations

SQL conforms in that it does permit a representation (at most one) to be specified for a given user-
defined type, and such a specification does involve components as assumed in RM Prescription 4.
It fails in that (as already noted) it does not automatically provide selector operators. It also fails
because every representation must involve at least one component.

5. Expose possible representations

SQL conforms, subject to its shortcomings with respect to RM Prescription 4. To repeat some
material from Chapter 10 (RM Very Strong Suggestion 8), the components of a representation are
called attributes1 (not to be confused with tuple and relation attributes as defined in the Manifesto),
and each attribute definition automatically causes definition of one observer method and one
mutator method. An SQL observer method is a read-only operator, of course, but an SQL mutator


1
 We are making a tacit assumption here that the type in question is a structured type specifically. The situation with
DISTINCT types is slightly different, but the differences are not important for present purposes.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                         509
Appendixes                                                     Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


is not the corresponding update operator that might have been expected (and the term is thus being
used in a somewhat unconventional manner). However, it is at least true that assignment of the
result of invoking such a method back to the applicable variable can achieve the required
“mutation” effect. For example, let T be a type, let V be a variable of type T, let C be a component
of the representation of type T, let TC be the type of that component, and let X be an expression of
type TC. Then the assignment
      SET V = V.C ( X ) ;       /* exp on right is a mutator invocation */

updates V such that its C component is set to the value of X and all other components remain
unchanged. Further, a shorthand is available that permits the foregoing assignment to be
abbreviated to just
      SET V.C = X ;

V.C here is thus SQL’s counterpart to our THE_C(V) pseudovariable.
     Nesting is supported on the left side, too, as in the following example:
      SET LS.BEGIN.X = Z ;

(Compare the discussion of nested THE_ pseudovariables in Chapter 6.) Note: As this example
suggests, throughout this appendix we use semicolons as statement terminators, as in direct SQL
[41,99].

6. Type generator TUPLE

SQL conforms to the following extent. First, it supports a ROW type constructor, which is the
obvious analog of our TUPLE type generator (SQL uses the term constructor rather than our
preferred generator). The components of a row type are called fields; thus, the SQL analog of our
heading is an ordered list (not a set—see below) of ordered pairs of the form <F,T>, where F is a
field name and T is the name of the corresponding type (which is not necessarily scalar). A row
type can be used for all of the purposes mentioned in RM Prescription 6.
       SQL fails in that it assigns significance to the left-to-right order of <F,T> pairs (in other
words, those pairs form an ordered list, not a set, as already noted). Thus, for example, the row
types
      ROW ( F1 T1, F2 T2 )

and
      ROW ( F2 T2, F1 T1 )

are different types in SQL.
      SQL also fails because it has no counterpart—or sometimes no direct counterpart—to certain
of our required tuple operators (WRAP, UNWRAP, tuple RENAME, tuple EXTEND, etc.).
      SQL also fails because every row type must involve at least one field. Moreover, SQL’s row
type support has to be regarded as vacuous, as it is typically not included in actual implementations.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       510
Appendixes                                                                  Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


7. Type generator RELATION

SQL fails, having nothing that corresponds to our RELATION type generator.1 It might be thought
that the MULTISET type constructor (new in SQL:2003) could be made to serve the purpose, but it
really cannot, even though a table is a multiset of rows and a row type can be the element type of a
multiset type. For one thing, relations (or relation bodies, rather) are sets, not multisets. For
another, an SQL row, in general, fails to conform to our definition of tuple. For a third, this support
is vacuous because most implementations at the time of writing do not support either row types or
multiset types. Also, the update operators INSERT, DELETE, UPDATE, and MERGE are not
defined for variables whose declared type is of the form ROW (...) MULTISET.
       SQL’s use of structured types as “named table types” and various associated facilities together
mean it also fails in connection with our requirement that relation types have names of a certain
prescribed form.
       SQL also fails because it has no direct counterpart to our required GROUP and UNGROUP
operators.

8. Equality

SQL fails. For certain types, equality is not even defined! To be specific, equality for user-defined
type T is—for some strange reason—defined only if an ordering is defined for T, and not all user-
defined types are required to have an ordering. Equality is also undefined for the built-in type
XML.
      SQL also fails because (as we saw in Chapter 6) it is possible in SQL for, e.g., the comparison
       'AB' = 'AB '

to give TRUE, while the comparison
       CHAR_LENGTH ('AB') = CHAR_LENGTH ('AB ')

gives FALSE (the left comparand evaluates to two and the right one to three). Note: The example
is an illustration of a more general phenomenon: namely, that SQL regards certain data values as
“equal but distinguishable.” For further discussion, see reference [41].
       We further remark that it is possible in SQL for the expression X = Y not to return TRUE and
yet for X and Y to be otherwise indistinguishable. Such is the case, for example, when X IS NULL
and Y IS NULL both give TRUE.
       SQL also fails here, seriously, in connection with user-defined types; the definer of such a
type can (and in fact must, if “=“ is to be supported at all) specify the algorithm by which the
system is to determine equality of values of the type, and there is no requirement, or even
suggestion, that that algorithm abide by RM Prescription 8.


1
  Except for “created temporary tables,” which are not tables at all but table type constructors of a very special and
restricted kind [41,99]. (A TABLE type constructor was included in early drafts of SQL:1999, but it ran into
difficulties, was shelved in the hope of speeding up the overall standardization process, and was not revived in
SQL:2003.)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                              511
Appendixes                                                      Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


       We remark finally that several of today’s SQL DBMSs fail to support equality for the
standard’s CHARACTER LARGE OBJECT (CLOB) and BINARY LARGE OBJECT (BLOB)
types.

9. Tuples

SQL conforms to the extent that its row concept is a counterpart to our tuple concept.
      SQL fails by attaching significance to the ordinal positions of row components (i.e., field
values). Also, we require tuple components to have names; row components in SQL have names
only when those names can be, and are, provided by the context in which the row in question is
used. In particular, SQL’s row value constructor (its analog of our tuple selector) takes the form
      [ ROW ] ( <exp commalist> )

and thus provides no way of specifying field names (also, it must be nonempty).
      SQL further fails in that a field “value” can be null, which, as we have already observed in
connection with RM Prescription 1, does not have all the properties required for it to qualify as a
value.

10. Relations

SQL conforms to the extent that its table concept is a counterpart to our relation concept. An SQL
table has:

  A counterpart to our heading, in the form of an ordered list of <C,T> pairs, where C is a column
    name and T is the name of the corresponding type (which is not necessarily scalar)

  A counterpart to our body, in the form of a bag or multiset (sometimes a set) of rows

      It narrowly escapes failure to conform to our requirement for every attribute or column to
have a name—even though it does allow the user to write an expression that yields a table that
contains columns for which no name is specified explicitly. It does so by requiring the system to
generate a name for each such column. However, such names are not required to be unique, since
SQL does in general permit distinct columns of the same table to have the same name!
      The VALUES construct of SQL provides a counterpart to our prescribed relation selector,
though of course it suffers from the failures we have already observed in connection with relations
in general.
      SQL fails in the following respects:

 ■    Every table must have at least one column.

 ■    Significance is attached to the left-to-right order of columns.

 ■    Two or more distinct columns of the same table can have the same name.

 ■    The collection of rows corresponding to our body is, in general, a bag, not a set.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       512
Appendixes                                                      Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


 ■    There is no direct counterpart to our relation-valued attributes (loosely, table-valued columns
      are not supported, though, bizarrely, columns of type ROW (...) MULTISET are).

 ■    Rows do not fully conform to our prescription for tuples (as already noted under RM
      Prescription 9).

     We observe too that, in its nomenclature at least, SQL does not adequately distinguish
between table values and table variables.

11. Scalar variables

SQL conforms (apart from its support for nulls).

12. Tuple variables

SQL conforms insofar as it conforms to RM Prescriptions 6 and 9.

13. Relation variables (relvars)

SQL conforms (to a greater extent than it does to RM Prescriptions 7 and 10), thanks to its support
for base tables, views, and declared temporary tables, its counterpart to our real, virtual, and private
relvars, respectively. As noted under RM Prescription 7, there is no counterpart in general to our
RELATION type generator; however, a base or declared temporary table definition can make use of
a construct that is somewhat analogous: namely, an ordered list of <C,T> pairs, where C is a column
name and T is the name of the corresponding type (which is not necessarily scalar). Further, no two
columns of a given base or declared temporary table are permitted to have the same name. (This
latter fact notwithstanding, SQL still attaches significance to the left-to-right order of the columns.)
       SQL fails because it allows a base table to be “of” some structured type,* instead of in terms
of an ordered list of <C,T> pairs. Certain operators—in particular, certain dereferencing
operators—and certain other properties apply to such base tables that do not apply to base tables
defined in the more usual way. Thus, SQL effectively supports two different kinds of base tables, a
fact we would certainly regard as violating the spirit, if not the letter, of RM Prescription 13. What
is more, we would also regard this second kind of base table as contravening RM Prescription 26
(because they violate orthogonality, parsimony, and conceptual integrity), RM Proscription 6
(because they mix logical and physical issues), OO Proscription 2 (because of their support for
dereferencing), and possibly other prescriptions and proscriptions as well.
       SQL also fails inasmuch as, at any isolation level other than SERIALIZABLE, updating a
base table is not logically equivalent to a simple relational assignment. The same is also likely to be
true if any triggered procedures have been defined for the pertinent base table.

14. Kinds of relvars

SQL conforms insofar as it conforms to RM Prescription 13. It fails in that it provides no
counterpart to our public relvars.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        513
Appendixes                                                       Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


15. Candidate keys

SQL fails. It permits but does not require keys for a base or declared temporary table, and does not
even permit them for a view. In addition, SQL permits one key to be a proper superset of another,
in which case it is blatantly not a key but a proper superkey.

16. Databases

Strictly speaking, there is no such thing as a database in SQL. Instead, there is something called
SQL-data, which is “data described by SQL-schemas—data that is under the control of an SQL-
implementation in an SQL-environment” [99]. However, some might say that SQL conforms to
the general intent of RM Prescription 16, inasmuch as “SQL-data” really means database relvars,
loosely speaking. Others might say it fails, because tables that are “of” some structured type carry
certain extra baggage, causing them to violate the uniformity of structure and operators that was a
prime objective of the relational model.

17. Transactions

SQL conforms.

18. Relational algebra

SQL conforms in that (a) all of the prescribed operators are directly or indirectly available, and (b)
it is possible to ensure by judicious use of the language that the operands to invocations of these
operators are effectively true relations (i.e., they are tables whose columns have distinct names,
whose bodies are sets, and whose rows contain no nulls). However, it fails in some cases, notably
MATCHING and NOT MATCHING, DIVIDEBY, SUMMARIZE, RENAME, and GROUP and
UNGROUP, to provide these operators “without excessive circumlocution.”
       That said, we should note that at the time of writing:

    ■   Many well-known SQL products have failed to implement NATURAL JOIN or JOIN with
        the USING option. As a result, the SQL analog of our own JOIN operation sometimes
        involves a very great deal of “excessive circumlocution” indeed (specifically, when tables of
        high degree are involved).

    ■   Most well-known SQL products have failed to implement the CORRESPONDING versions
        of UNION, INTERSECT, and EXCEPT. As a result, there is often no direct SQL analog of
        our UNION, INTERSECT, and MINUS operators (which place no significance on left-to-
        right column ordering, of course).

    ■   The most important feature of all so far as expressive completeness is concerned—namely,
        the ability to specify table expressions1 of arbitrary complexity in the FROM clause—is still
        absent from some implementations.


1
    The standard SQL term is query expression.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        514
Appendixes                                                     Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


19. Relvar names, relation selectors, and recursion

SQL conforms with respect to relation selector invocations and recursion. First, a VALUES
invocation is a valid table expression. Second, the WITH clause permits a table expression to be
given a name and for that very name to be referenced in that very expression, thereby supporting
what are commonly known as recursive queries (which are also supported via CREATE VIEW).
      SQL fails to permit a table name to be a valid table expression. The current value of a named
table can be referenced by writing the word TABLE, or alternatively SELECT * FROM, in front of
the name in question; however, we do not regard these features as satisfying this part of RM
Prescription 19.

20. User-defined tuple and relation operators

SQL conforms to some extent, with its support for nonupdatable views. However, it fails in that its
view definitions cannot be parameterized. Note: Most of the remarks under RM Prescription 7
regarding SQL’s support for types of the form ROW (...) MULTISET apply here also, mutatis
mutandis.

21. Assignments

SQL conforms, more or less, with respect to scalar and tuple assignment (apart from known
violations of The Assignment Principle and other failures already noted in connection with tuples).
It also supports assignment to targets of MULTISET types, including in particular those of types
ROW (...) MULTISET. However, it fails with respect to relational assignment, because “relvars”—
base tables and updatable views, in SQL terms—cannot be directly assigned to; they can only have
their current values “modified” via INSERT, DELETE, UPDATE, and MERGE (and even there
violations of The Assignment Principle can occur).
       SQL’s conformance includes support for multiple assignment in connection with scalar and
tuple assignment, and also in connection with assignment to MULTISET targets. But, crucially,
this support does not directly extend to its table update operators INSERT, DELETE, UPDATE,
and MERGE.
       We observe too that there is a certain anomaly in the SQL provisions for assignment, arising
from its support for nulls. To be specific, it is not always the case that, immediately following the
assignment SET X = Y, the comparison X = Y gives TRUE (in other words, The Assignment
Principle is violated again). Further, when this anomalous circumstance arises, it is not necessarily
the case that Y is null. For example, Y could be a value of some user-defined type T such that Y.C
IS NULL gives TRUE for some component (attribute) C of Y, while Y IS NULL is FALSE.

22. Comparisons

SQL conforms to this prescription with respect to scalar comparisons. It also conforms with
respect to tuple comparisons, subject to failures already noted in connection with tuples, and subject
also to the failure that it expressly does support the “tuple”—or, rather, row—comparison operators
“<“, “>“, etc. It also conforms to our prescription for an operator to test membership of a tuple in a




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       515
Appendixes                                                      Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


relation, via that version of its IN operator that takes a row expression on the left side and a table
expression on the right side.
       SQL also conforms to this prescription with respect to relation comparisons, but only very
circuitously (a fact that is slightly odd, since SQL does provide more direct support for multiset
comparisons). For example, let tables T1 and T2 denote true relations of the same relation type (in
Manifesto terms). Then an SQL analog of the relation comparison T1 = T2 can be expressed as
follows:
      NOT EXISTS ( SELECT * FROM T1 EXCEPT CORRESPONDING SELECT * FROM T2 )
      AND
      NOT EXISTS ( SELECT * FROM T2 EXCEPT CORRESPONDING SELECT * FROM T1 )

23. Integrity constraints

SQL conforms with respect to database constraints, insofar as it does permit the definition of such
constraints of arbitrary complexity. It also supports a certain degree of constraint inference, via
functional dependency analysis. However, it also fails on at least two counts: its support for
deferred constraints, which are checked only when the user “switches on” the necessary checking
(end-of-transaction at the latest) by means of SET CONSTRAINTS—all constraint checking is
immediate in the Manifesto—and its support for updatable views that are specified without WITH
CASCADED CHECK OPTION.
      For reasons explained in detail in Appendix F, SQL fails completely with respect to type
constraints. Note: Do not be misled by the fact that (as noted in passing in Chapter 3) SQL does
include something it calls “domains,” and those “domains” do have associated constraints. But
those “domains” are not true types—they are nothing to do with true relational domains—and those
“domain constraints” are not true type constraints; rather, they are database constraints, in Manifesto
terms, that happen to have been specified in a rather unorthodox way.

24. Total database constraints

SQL conforms insofar as it conforms to RM Prescription 23.

25. Catalog

SQL conforms in that its catalogs are themselves collections of tables (meaning table variables, of
course).
      SQL fails to support assignment to those tables for two reasons. First, the tables in question
are nonupdatable views (so they are not really table variables!); second, SQL in any case has
deficient support for relation assignment, as already noted under RM Prescription 21.

26. Language design

SQL fails to some considerable extent by most, if not all, of the generally agreed yardsticks of good
language design. More specifically, it fails with respect to at least the following measures:
conceptual integrity, syntactic consistency, parsimony, and orthogonality.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        516
Appendixes                                                     Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


 ■   It fails with respect to conceptual integrity in its treatment of nulls, for example. The
     originally intended interpretation of nulls when they were first introduced into SQL was
     “value unknown,” and this interpretation accounts for the behavior of nulls in (e.g.)
     comparisons. Yet SQL sometimes generates nulls in circumstances where such an
     interpretation is utterly inappropriate. The nulls that result from OUTER JOIN, for example,
     might perhaps signify “not applicable”; the null that results from attempting to compute the
     average of an empty set of numbers surely signifies “undefined”; and the null that results from
     an attempt to sum that same set is just a perverse way of indicating zero. We remind you too
     that null is also used in SQL to signify “the third truth value” (see the discussion of RM
     Prescription 1, earlier in this appendix).
           On another front, SQL claims that its tables, in general, are bags (multisets) of rows; yet
     the normal union operator on bags is not directly provided, and considerable circumlocution is
     required to obtain its effect.
           In any case, SQL concepts are not agreeably few, and they include many that in our
     opinion are not agreeable at all—for example, nulls, three-valued logic, left-to-right column
     ordering, duplicate rows, anonymous columns, subtables and supertables (see Appendix G),
     and many others.

 ■   SQL fails with respect to syntactic consistency in the various ways it uses AS to give a name
     to an expression. In some contexts, such as the SELECT and FROM clauses, the expression
     comes before the AS and the name after. In others, such as the CREATE VIEW statement
     and the WITH clause, the name comes before and the expression after. And in some cases the
     AS is optional, while in others it is required.
          SQL also fails in this respect in that the keyword TABLE sometimes means any named
     table (as in the query expression TABLE T) and sometimes a base table specifically (as in
     CREATE TABLE T).
          SQL also fails in this respect in that some options that are expressed using the keyword
     WITH have explicit converses using WITHOUT, while others do not. Cursor declarations
     can be WITH or WITHOUT both HOLD and RETURN. DESCRIBE can be WITH or
     WITHOUT NESTING. A view definition can be WITH CHECK OPTION but cannot be
     WITHOUT it. A privilege can be granted WITH GRANT OPTION but cannot be granted
     WITHOUT it.
          By way of another example (based on one in reference [41]), consider the following
     expressions:
     SELECT * FROM ( A NATURAL JOIN B ) AS T
     SELECT * FROM ( A UNION B ) AS T
     TABLE A UNION TABLE B
     TABLE A NATURAL JOIN TABLE B
     SELECT * FROM A UNION SELECT * FROM B
     SELECT * FROM A NATURAL JOIN SELECT * FROM B
     ( TABLE A ) UNION ( TABLE B )
     ( TABLE A ) NATURAL JOIN ( TABLE B )
     ( TABLE A ) AS AA NATURAL JOIN ( TABLE B ) AS BB




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       517
Appendixes                                                     Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


     Some of these expressions are syntactically valid and others not, and it is a nontrivial exercise
     to figure out or remember which are which.

 ■   SQL fails with respect to parsimony in the remarkable (and regrettable) degree of
     redundancy—the variety of different ways, that is, sometimes radically different ways, of
     achieving the same effect—that has been noted by the present authors among others (see, e.g.
     reference [62]). For example, the plugging of those “holes” in the original SQL language that
     rendered it relationally incomplete has made all of the following features logically redundant:
     GROUP BY, HAVING, subqueries, and correlation names. And of these, we venture to
     suggest that HAVING, at least, is positively undesirable.

 ■   With respect to orthogonality, SQL:1992 had already addressed many of the complaints that
     very early on made SQL quite notorious among computer languages. However, some
     violations remained and persist in SQL:2003, along with a few more that were introduced in
     SQL:1999 (e.g., restrictions on the use of ROW types). For example:

     ●    The availability of the CASCADE option of DROP depends on the kind of object being
          dropped.

     ●    It is not possible to define subtypes of built-in types or DISTINCT types.

     ●    The VALUES ARE SYSTEM GENERATED feature in column definitions is available
          only for base tables that are “of” a user-defined type. At least on the face of it, it would
          appear that these two features, “of” and VALUES ARE SYSTEM GENERATED, should
          be orthogonal.

     The foregoing list of criticisms is not exhaustive.


RM PROSCRIPTIONS

1. No attribute ordering

SQL fails. Examples of where SQL attaches significance to the left-to-right order of columns
include:

 ■   SELECT *

 ■   UNION, INTERSECT, EXCEPT (without CORRESPONDING in each case)

 ■   CREATE VIEW (if column names are specified)

 ■   INSERT (if no column names are specified)

 ■   Row comparisons and assignments




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       518
Appendixes                                                                Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


    ■   IN (of rows and tables)

    ■   VALUES

2. No tuple ordering

SQL conforms.

3. No duplicate tuples

SQL fails. Duplicate rows can arise in at least the following ways:

    ■   SELECT without DISTINCT

    ■   INSERT into a base table for which no candidate key is specified

    ■   UNION ALL

    ■   Specifying the same row more than once in an invocation of VALUES

4. No nulls

SQL fails.

5. No nullological mistakes

SQL fails. Examples:

    ■   Requiring at least one column in every table

    ■   Requiring at least one expression in the SELECT clause

    ■   Requiring at least one column in every key

     Note: RM Proscription 5 specifically addresses only tables and keys, but we note here for
purposes of reference certain further nullological mistakes in SQL:

    ■   Requiring at least one table reference in the FROM clause1

    ■   Requiring at least one item in ORDER BY (though in this case the desired effect can be
        obtained by omitting the clause)

    ■   Several errors in the handling of empty tables (for example, treating such a table as a null in
        the context of a scalar subquery)


1
    Some implementations commendably do not adhere to this restriction.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                             519
Appendixes                                                    Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


6. No internal-level constructs

SQL conforms.

7. No tuple-level operations

SQL fails. Its FETCH operation (not to be confused with our TUPLE FROM operator) retrieves an
individual row. Worse, its DELETE and UPDATE WHERE CURRENT OF CURSOR operations
operate on individual rows.

8. No composite attributes

SQL conforms.

9. No domain check override

SQL conforms.

10. Not SQL

SQL fails. The language defined in the SQL specification is called SQL.


OO PRESCRIPTIONS

1. Compile-time type checking

SQL conforms.

2. Type inheritance (conditional)

SQL fails by definition here, because it does not abide by the inheritance model described in Part
IV of this book. We can be more specific than this, however, and we will be under the various IM
Prescriptions later in this appendix.

3. Computational completeness

SQL conforms via its Persistent Stored Modules feature, SQL/PSM.

4. Explicit transaction boundaries

SQL conforms, almost, with respect to transaction termination, but fails with respect to transaction
initiation, which is allowed (and in some implementations required) to be implicit. Note: The
reason for that “almost” qualifier is explained in Chapter 8.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      520
Appendixes                                                      Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


5. Nested transactions

SQL fails. It does provide some analogous and useful functionality by means of its savepoint
feature, but establishing a savepoint is not the same as starting a transaction [96]. In any case, one
of the purposes of being able to nest transactions is to allow a unit of work to be specified
independently of whether that unit is to be executed as an outermost transaction or as part of some
encompassing transaction. Starting a transaction and establishing a savepoint are distinct operations
in SQL, and they use different syntax.

6. Aggregate operators and empty sets

SQL fails, because SUM, AVG, MAX, MIN, EVERY, and ANY all incorrectly return null if
invoked on an empty argument. Note: For simplicity we ignore here the additional aggregate
operators introduced with what was originally called “SQL/OLAP” (see reference [76]), which have
since been folded into Part 2 of the standard, “SQL/Foundation.”


OO PROSCRIPTIONS

1. Relvars are not domains

It might be argued that SQL conforms, despite its support for what we called “the second kind of
base table” under RM Prescription 13 earlier in this appendix, because it turns out that rows in such
tables are just rows and not values of the type that the table is declared to be “of.” We prefer to say
it fails, because there is no doubt that support for that second kind of base table was motivated by a
desire to perceive object classes as analogous to relvars. For example, an operator is provided to
derive a value of the “of” type from a given row, and the system-generated REF values in the “self-
referencing column” of such a table are intended to be analogous to object IDs (they thus prevent
SQL from supporting type inheritance according to the model proposed in this book).

2. No object IDs

Again it might be argued the SQL conforms, because even though (to repeat) its system-generated
REF values do look very much like object IDs, they also manage not quite to violate the letter of
OO Proscription 2. We prefer to say it fails, for the reason given in connection with OO
Proscription 1.


RM VERY STRONG SUGGESTIONS

1. System keys

SQL conforms, via its “identity columns” feature (new in SQL:2003), and also to some extent via
its VALUES ARE SYSTEM GENERATED feature which, as we have already observed under RM
Prescription 26, is not as generally available as we feel it might be. It has no analog of our
suggested TAG operator.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        521
Appendixes                                                      Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


2. Foreign keys

SQL conforms.

3. Candidate key inference

SQL conforms insofar as it conforms to RM Prescription 15. Note: Although SQL does require
candidate keys to be inferred for query results, it makes only limited use of the results of such
inference. The details are beyond the scope of this appendix.

4. Transition constraints

SQL fails. Note: It might be possible to use CREATE TRIGGER to achieve some (not all) of the
same functionality as a general declarative transition constraint, but CREATE TRIGGER is at least
partly procedural in nature. In particular, it specifies when the triggered procedure is to be invoked
(e.g., ON UPDATE). One consequence is that it might be possible—for example—to subvert an
UPDATE triggered procedure by executing a DELETE followed by an INSERT instead of
executing an UPDATE per se.

5. Quota queries

SQL conforms via its support for the functions RANK and DENSE_RANK.

6. Generalized transitive closure

SQL conforms, via its support for recursion in WITH clauses and view definitions.

7. User-defined generic operators

SQL fails.

8. SQL migration

Not applicable (SQL is not a valid D).


OO VERY STRONG SUGGESTIONS

1. Type inheritance

SQL necessarily fails, because it fails on OO Prescription 2.

2. Types and operators unbundled

SQL partly conforms and partly fails. Some operators (namely, those specifically designated as
“methods”) must be bundled, others must not.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        522
Appendixes                                                     Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


3. Single-level store

SQL conforms to some extent, through its feature SQL/PSM, but fails when used as an “embedded
data sublanguage.”


IM PRESCRIPTIONS

1. Types are sets

SQL conforms.

2. Subtypes are subsets

SQL conforms, but in a rather peculiar way, inasmuch as the set of all values of type T is not fully
known until all proper subtypes of T have been defined. Note: The requirement that proper
subtypes be proper subsets is not really supported, however, since SQL does not support type
constraints (as we saw under RM Prescription 23).

3. “Subtype of” is reflexive

SQL conforms.

4. Proper subtypes

SQL conforms, except as noted under IM Prescription 2.

5. “Subtype of” is transitive

SQL conforms.

6. Immediate subtypes

SQL conforms (but it uses the term direct in place of the more apt immediate).

7. Root types disjoint

SQL conforms for single inheritance. It also conforms for multiple inheritance insofar as it
supports multiple inheritance at all (which is not very far—see IM Prescription 22, later). Note:
The SQL term for root type is maximal supertype (not to be confused with a maximal type in the
sense of IM Prescription 20). Oddly, the SQL term for leaf type is not minimal subtype but leaf
type.

8. Scalar values with inheritance

SQL conforms for single inheritance. It also conforms for multiple inheritance, insofar as it
supports multiple inheritance at all.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      523
Appendixes                                                       Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


9. Scalar variables with inheritance

SQL conforms.

10. Specialization by constraint

SQL fails completely; in fact, as we saw earlier, it does not support type constraints at all.

11. Assignment with inheritance

SQL conforms.

12. Equality etc. with inheritance

SQL necessarily fails, owing to its failure on RM Prescription 8. What is more—in terms of our
running example from Chapter 14—SQL would even allow a comparison between an ellipse and a
polygon to give TRUE. In other words, there is no requirement that the most specific types be the
same in order for the comparison to give TRUE.

13. Join etc. with inheritance

SQL conforms insofar as it conforms to IM Prescription 12.

14. TREAT

SQL conforms inasmuch as it does support a TREAT operator (in fact the operator in question is
called TREAT). However, it fails to support a TREAT pseudovariable.

15. Type testing

SQL conforms. Here is the SQL analog of our IS_T(X):
      TYPE ( X ) [ IS ] OF ( T )

The optional IS is a noiseword. The expression following OF is a parenthesized commalist of <type
specification>s (possibly including specifications of the form TYPE (<exp>), so SQL also supports
an analog of our IS_SAME_TYPE_AS (Y,X)). Analogous remarks apply to all of the other
operators discussed in this subsection (see below).
      SQL also supports an analog of our relational operator R:IS_T(A). However, its support is
clumsy. Let R denote a relation with attributes A, B, and C. Then the SQL analog of our R:IS_T(A)
looks like this:
      ( SELECT DISTINCT TREAT A AS T AS A, B, C
        FROM   R
        WHERE TYPE ( A ) IS OF ( T ) )

Such expressions become increasingly cumbersome as the number of attributes increases.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      524
Appendixes                                                      Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


     SQL also supports “most specific type” analogs of the foregoing operators. Here is the SQL
analog of IS_MS_T(X):
      TYPE ( X ) [ IS ] OF ( ONLY T )

(However, we cannot help remarking in passing that the keyword ONLY here is very misleading if
T is not a root type.) And—with the same assumptions as before—here is the SQL analog of
R:IS_MS_T(A):
      ( SELECT DISTINCT TREAT A AS T AS A, B, C
        FROM   R
        WHERE TYPE ( A ) IS OF ( ONLY T ) )

      SQL also provides an operator that returns the most specific type of its argument as a
character string.

16. Read-only operator inheritance and value substitutability

SQL conforms.

17. Operator signatures

In our discussion of IM Prescription 17 in Chapter 14, we suggested that all arguments to a given
operator invocation should participate equally in the run-time binding process. SQL nearly
conformed to this suggestion when inheritance was first introduced (in SQL:1999) but was changed
at the eleventh hour. The reason for the change was that Java and C++, the two most likely host
languages for applications using the “object” portions of SQL, themselves do not conform to the
suggestion; rather, they perform run-time binding on the basis of the first argument only. As a
result, SQL now supports both (a) Java- and C++-style methods (sometimes called selfish methods),
for which the binding process is performed at run time on the basis of the most specific type of the
first argument only, and (b) “nonmethod” operators called functions and procedures, for which the
binding process is performed at compile time on the basis (necessarily) of the declared types of all
arguments. Thus, SQL fails on this part of IM Prescription (a) for methods (because of their
“selfish” nature) and (b) for functions and procedures (because here there is no run-time binding at
all).
       With regard to the different kinds of signatures required by IM Prescription 17, SQL’s
methods conform fully, while its functions and procedures do so only partially (in effect,
specification and version signatures are combined in the latter case).
       SQL has no requirement that if several versions of a given operator exist under the covers,
then those versions all implement the same semantics.

18. Read-only parameters to update operators

SQL conforms.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     525
Appendixes                                                                    Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


19. Update operator inheritance and variable substitutability

SQL fails. It requires update operators to be inherited unconditionally.

20. Union, dummy, and maximal and minimal types

Not clear. SQL does support both (a) INSTANTIABLE types and NOT INSTANTIABLE types
and (b) types that have a declared representation and types that do not. An INSTANTIABLE type
with a declared representation is the straightforward case, of course. A NOT INSTANTIABLE
type might correspond to our union type (regular or dummy depending on whether it has a declared
representation or not), though it is hard to be sure. An INSTANTIABLE type with no proper
supertype and no declared representation seems to be a type with exactly one value, like a Tutorial
D type with a <possrep def> that contains no <possrep component def>s. An INSTANTIABLE
nonroot type that adds no attributes to its inherited representation appears to be the degenerate case
of subtyping by extension whereby the subtype does not actually “extend” its supertype at all.
Perhaps such a subtype might be used for cases where specialization by constraint would be
appropriate, if only it were available. But the responsibility for avoiding nonsenses such as
noncircular circles would then lie with the type user instead of the type definer.

21. Tuple/relation subtypes and supertypes

SQL conforms with respect to tuples. Having no relation type generator at all, it obviously fails
with respect to relations. (We remark, however, that SQL does support array and multiset subtypes
and supertypes, and these constructs are defined in a manner analogous to the way the Manifesto
defines tuple and relation subtypes and supertypes. Thus, for example, the type T' MULTISET is a
subtype of the type T MULTISET if and only if T' is a subtype of T.)

22. Tuple/relation values with inheritance

SQL conforms with respect to tuples, albeit vacuously, inasmuch as tuple parameters to user-
defined operators are not supported1 (in fact the support is vacuous anyway because most
implementations at the time of writing do not support row types at all). Having no relation type
generator at all, it obviously fails with respect to relations.

23. Maximal and minimal tuple/relation types

SQL fails.




1
  This conformance corresponds to the only kind of multiple inheritance supported by SQL. (Actually, SQL is usually
described as not supporting multiple inheritance at all; however, Chapter 16 of the present book shows that multiple
inheritance is necessarily supported to some degree, even if only implicitly, if (a) single inheritance for scalar types, and
(b) tuple and/or relation types, are both supported.)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             526
Appendixes                                                    Appendix H / A Comparison with SQL


24. Tuple/relation most specific types

SQL conforms with respect to tuples, vacuously. Having no relation type generator at all, it
obviously fails with respect to relations.

25. Tuple/relation variables with inheritance

SQL conforms with respect to tuples. Having no relation type generator at all, it obviously fails
with respect to relations.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     527