                                                   Appendix J

         The Next 25 Years of the Relational Model?

                   This appendix appeared in the two previous editions of this book
                   but not in this edition. We have resurrected it here for historical
                   interest, considering that some readers may not have seen it before.


REMARKS ON REPUBLICATION

This appendix consists of a lightly edited version of an interview conducted by Rick van der Lans1
with the present authors in 1994 [39]. The original abstract (the original English language abstract,
that is—the first published version of the interview was in Dutch) read as follows:

      For the past [several years] Hugh Darwen and Chris Date have been working on a document with the intriguing
      title: The Third Manifesto ... The objective of this document is (to quote the authors) to ‘present a manifesto for
      the future direction of data and database management systems.’ It can be seen as an attempt to give a reasonably
      complete definition of a new version of the relational model; it can also be seen, more specifically, as an
      alternative to two previous manifestos on database systems. In this interview the authors clarify certain aspects
      of [their Manifesto] and explain why they wrote it.

       What follows is basically the English language version of the original interview [41], with just
a few revisions (all very minor). The footnotes are new.
       Note: Since Codd’s first paper on the relational model [20] appeared in 1969, 1994 was the
relational model’s Silver Jubilee. It thus seemed appropriate at the time of the interview to give
some thought to the next 25 years; hence our choice of title (for both the interview itself and this
appendix). We are grateful to Rick van der Lans, also to InfoIT Inc., publishers of InfoDB (where
the English language version first appeared), for permission to republish the material in the present
book.


INTRODUCTION

As indicated in the abstract, The Third Manifesto has been written by Hugh Darwen and Chris Date,
two well-known names in the database world. Why did they write it? What are its goals? Why the
“third” manifesto? To enable the reader to understand the following interview better, we first
discuss why there are now three manifestos related to database technology. We also briefly


1
  Rick F. van der Lans is an independent consultant, author, and lecturer specializing in database technology,
development tools, and information modeling. He is Managing Director of R20/Consultancy, a company based in The
Netherlands. He served for over six years on the Dutch committee responsible for developing the international (ISO)
standard for SQL.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                         541
Appendixes                                           Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


describe the objectives and backgrounds of the first two, for the benefit of readers who might not be
familiar with them.
       As we all know, relational technology has always been under attack. From its birth it has
been criticized. In the first few years the main objection was that it was “just theory”—it was “just
plain impossible” to build a commercial system on relational concepts. Then, when the first
relational products came on the market, they were considered to be too slow for building OLTP
systems. Now that relational products have proven that they can support hundreds of users on
multi-gigabyte databases, the latest cry is that relational technology is not suitable for new
application requirements. The application of the future wants to store so-called unstructured data
(images, sound, free text), and wants to perform complex operations, such as scanning images or
compressing sound. The question is: Are these criticisms truly valid? In other words, has
relational technology finally met its Waterloo? Is it really not suitable for new application
requirements?
       Some people believe we need a new type of database system, based not on relational concepts
but on object-oriented concepts (such as inheritance, classes, polymorphism, etc.). This is why
object-oriented (OO) DBMSs have received so much attention recently. However, one
disadvantage of commercial OO systems has been (and still is) that they use a variety of different
terminology. Partly for this reason, in 1989 a manifesto was written entitled The Object-Oriented
Database System Manifesto [2]. This manifesto listed rules to which a system should conform in
order to be called an object-oriented DBMS. It was intended to bring some order and structure to
the confusing world of OODBMSs. Because the authors all had an OO background, their
assumption was that the database of the future needs an OO foundation, not a relational one.
       One year later, in 1990, a second manifesto was published with the title: Third-Generation
Database System Manifesto [129]. In a way this document was a response to the first manifesto. It
was written by another group of database experts, mainly people with a relational background,
including Michael Stonebraker (at that time with Ingres) and James Gray (at that time with DEC).
The opinion of these authors was that no new data model was needed—extending the relational
model with new concepts could do the job. Their aim was to define a set of required characteristics
for all future DBMSs. Those characteristics (defined through a set of tenets and propositions) were
based on new application and business requirements.
       Note that neither of the first two manifestos tried to define new database models or new
languages; they simply listed requirements, or in other words minimal characteristics, that DBMSs
really ought (in the authors’ opinions) to adhere to.
       The Third Manifesto [40] has a different standpoint. It tries to give a reasonably formal and
complete definition of a new version of the relational model. This new version, which the authors
call D,1 is still compatible with the classic relational model as originally defined by Dr. E. F. Codd.
However, by defining certain concepts, especially domains, more precisely, the authors believe they
can show that the relational model is suitable for the new application requirements referred to
above.


1
  This characterization of our objectives is not really accurate. First, D is just a language (any language) that realizes
the ideas of The Third Manifesto in some concrete form. Second, The Third Manifesto does attempt to define the
relational model very precisely—as noted in Chapter 1, in fact, we would like it to be seen in part as a definitive
statement of that model—but we would never claim that it constitutes “a new version” of that model.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             542
Appendixes                                          Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


      The main body of The Third Manifesto is divided into six sections: Relational Model
Prescriptions, Proscriptions, and Very Strong Suggestions, and OO Prescriptions, Proscriptions, and
Very Strong Suggestions.1 By the way, OO here stands for Other Orthogonal!—it includes, but is
not limited to, features that are commonly regarded as part of object orientation. A small amount of
new terminology is introduced, such as relational variable (relvar), in order to clarify certain
aspects of the relational model. The document is still in draft form; however, the authors feel it is
stable enough to serve as a basis for an interview such as the one that follows.


BACKGROUND

van der Lans: Let’s start with some background. Could you explain what your goal was in
writing The Third Manifesto? Why did you write it? What do you hope or expect will happen
to it?

Darwen: Our goal was to alert “the market” to the possibility of a future in which users could:

    ■   Control and enjoy their own data;

    ■   And be able to ask any questions of that data that might arise;

    ■   And have sufficient confidence in the answers provided by the system to take actions that
        might be suggested by those answers, even bold actions.

We wrote the Manifesto because current database products do not, in our opinion, hold out such
promise; because neither of the two previous manifestos, in our opinion, clearly shows the right way
forward; and because we think we can see a clear way forward, solidly based on a theory that has
already stood the test of time—namely, the relational model of data.
      What will happen to the Manifesto? Very likely, “the market,” in its complacency, will
continue to embrace either SQL or the current OODBMSs, in the mistaken belief that our goals will
be met that way. Alternatively, we might find that “the market” doesn’t share our goals. Less
pessimistically, we would like somebody to be inspired to define the language we have generically
called D, and we would like that effort in turn to inspire somebody to implement that language
(even if initially just in a standalone, single-user environment suitable for domestic, scientific, or
small enterprise use).
      If this last situation materializes, people will be able to see and touch something that really is
a Prince [26] in comparison with what’s currently available. Put it another way: Let’s agree that,
say, Pascal, or Ada, or <your own favorite language> is a Prince alongside the much derided but
very widely used COBOL, FORTRAN, or BASIC; we want there to be a database Pascal, or Ada,
or <your own favorite language>, too.




1
  In the interview as originally published the various prescriptions, proscriptions, and “very strong suggestions” were
summarized in a sidebar. That sidebar is omitted from this appendix.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          543
Appendixes                                  Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


van der Lans: What are the two or three main deviations from or extensions to the classical
relational model as defined by Codd? Are there areas of the Manifesto that are not
“compatible” with the relational model?

Date: Well, first of all it’s important to understand that “the classical relational model” itself has
evolved over time. Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that our own understanding of it
has evolved over time, so that we now have a clearer notion of what domains really are, what
candidate keys really are, even what relations themselves really are (and so on). In the most recent
edition of my book An Introduction to Database Systems, I’ve tried to describe our current
understanding of the model as carefully as I can [81]. I must emphasize, however, that we are
indeed talking evolution here, not revolution; the relational model as we currently see it is not
wildly different from Codd’s original vision, it’s just more carefully pinned down in certain
respects, and slightly extended here and there (e.g., with additional operators).
      Having said all that, I would now like to state categorically that there are NO “deviations” in
our Manifesto from the relational model as we now understand it (i.e., as documented in reference
[81]). And the sole “extension”—which isn’t in fact an extension at all!—is that domains are seen
for what they really are, which is data types: possibly system-defined data types, more generally
user-defined data types, of potentially arbitrary complexity.
      You see, people tend to think of the relational model as dealing only with very simple data
types, like numbers and strings. In fact, however, the relational model nowhere states what data
types are allowed. The question as to what data types are allowed IS COMPLETELY
ORTHOGONAL TO the question of supporting the relational model as such. So you can have a
data type (or domain—they’re the same thing) of engineering blueprints, or books, or time series, or
architectural drawings, or videos, or X-rays, or absolutely anything else you like.
      Of course, you must understand that support for user-defined data types includes support for
user-defined operators, and most likely support for data type inheritance too (subtypes and
supertypes). I’m sure we’ll come back to these topics later.
      No, there are no areas of the Manifesto that are incompatible with the relational model.

Darwen: Chris is right, we don’t deviate from the relational model, nor do we extend it. A
language that conforms to our Manifesto is entirely compatible with the classical relational model.
By contrast, we do deviate a great deal from SQL, but that is (of course) because SQL deviates a
great deal from the relational model, as well as being a rather poorly designed language by any
measure.
      Some might say that our demand for support for data types of arbitrary complexity is a
deviation from or extension to the relational model. We think that those who interpret the relational
model’s insistence on “atomicity” as meaning that the only data types you can have are numbers,
strings, dates, and times are those who have axes of their own to grind and want there to be
weaknesses in the relational model.

van der Lans: What is the history of the Manifesto? How did it evolve? When did you start
thinking about it? Why the decision to publish a draft first?

Darwen: The idea of writing a manifesto first entered my mind when the other two came to my
attention, in about 1991 I suppose. I just couldn’t bear the idea of leaving the last word with them.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       544
Appendixes                                         Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


Also, Chris and I had been talking about devising a proper relational language ever since 1988 or
so, when we started to collaborate on various database writings (including our attempt—at once
hilarious and depressing—to produce a clarifying guide to the SQL:1992 standard [51]). However,
we both really knew that such talk was idle and dreamy, for we both lead very busy professional
lives that leave little time for such backroom work. One day, over a beer somewhere, I turned to
Chris and said “Oh, by the way, I know what the language is called: D,” and he nodded his
immediate comprehension and assent. However, I keep the joke (that it stands for “Date and
Darwen’s Database Dream”) for my lectures: We don’t see any need for an explanation in the
Manifesto itself.
       Things came to a head after the publication of the SQL:1992 standard, when I, as a member of
the ISO SQL committee SC21, turned my attention to the evolving SQL3 proposals. [Note: As
explained in the preface to the present book, “SQL3” was for many years a code name for what
ultimately became the SQL:1999 standard.] I discovered that people were proposing to use the new
“abstract data type” facility for defining tables, as well as for the obviously theoretically correct
purpose of defining columns; and I discovered that, as might be expected of such a peculiar idea, it
just didn’t hold water, technically. (It was eventually abandoned in SQL3, at the summer 1993
SC21 meeting in Yokohama.1)
       Worse, I discovered that those OODBMSs that were attempting to provide ad hoc query and
declarative integrity support, à la relational, were making the same fatal mistake. The mooted
manifesto could wait no longer, and I promised Chris that I would deliver an initial draft in early
1994—which I did, in February of that year. That draft was five pages long; our current draft is
(regrettably) 30 pages2 ... However, the first draft’s structure and style have survived this expansion,
I’m glad to say. Since that first draft, there have been countless faxes, phone calls, and
consultations with other people, not to mention numerous weekend slogs over Chris’s computer at
his home in California.

Date: As Hugh says, we’d been thinking for several years about the idea of trying to design the
“ideal” database language (well, if not ideal, then at least a language that was much more faithful
than SQL to the principles of the relational model). Certainly I remember discussing such an idea
many times in the mid to late 1980s. But it was the increasing emphasis in the marketplace on OO
database technology, and especially the recent (mostly flawed) attempts to marry OO and relational
ideas together, that finally got us moving ... I guess it was the fact that the industry seemed to be on
the brink of making what was arguably an even bigger mistake than the original SQL decision that
spurred us to get something down on paper at last. As Hugh has explained, he wrote the first draft
in early 1994 (so the structure of the document as a series of prescriptions, proscriptions, and “very
strong suggestions” is due to him), and we have collaborated on every iteration since then.
       I wouldn’t say we’ve exactly “published” the draft yet. All we’ve done is distributed it to a
fairly wide group of technical people (both in Europe and in the USA—elsewhere too as a matter of
fact), in order to get feedback that will help us feel more comfortable about whatever the final


1
    But see the final section of Appendix H.
2
  The expansion was due mainly to the addition of clarifying commentary. As you can see from Chapter 3 of the
present book, the final version of the Manifesto as such—not counting the inheritance prescriptions, which were added
later anyway—is still only some ten or so pages.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       545
Appendixes                                        Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


version looks like. By the way, I’d like to mention that the feedback so far has been almost entirely
positive; no one has shown that the complete project is misguided!—so we’re beginning to get a
fairly warm feeling about the whole idea. We’d like to have the final version ready sometime
before the end of this year.1 As for actual publication of that version, we’re still examining our
options.

van der Lans: What is Codd’s opinion on The Third Manifesto, if he has read it?

Date: I don’t know if Codd has read the document yet. We look forward to hearing his opinion in
due course.

van der Lans: Have the DBMS vendors already shown interest in the language D?

Darwen: The language D doesn’t yet exist! In any case, we didn’t really expect the vendor
community to display any immediate interest in either D per se or the Manifesto in general (though
in fact it would already be not quite right to say there’s been no interest at all). After all, the
vendors are heavily committed to SQL; they’re not going to risk huge amounts of venture capital on
an alternative until a clear demand emerges for such a thing. From their perspective, a self-
proclaimed “manifesto” by a couple of pundits who’ve been getting up the vendors’ collective nose
for many years does not by itself constitute such a clear demand, obviously. Our most realistic hope
is that interest is aroused in the more aware sections of the user and academic communities.
Somebody has to define a D, and then somebody has to persuade some vendor to make a D
implementation.

van der Lans: Isn’t your Manifesto too late, since we already have products on the market
that try to combine relational and OO technology, such as UniSQL and Illustra (previously
known as Montage)2—especially since you’ve chosen a different approach for integration?
And what about the OO support in SQL3?

Date: We feel it’s important to try to lay down what we think is the right way to move forward,
even if there are huge obstacles to overcome in making such a move. After all, what’s the
alternative? If you just accept the status quo, progress is impossible (this is true in all walks of
life!). Furthermore, we’re very concerned that—as I’ve already mentioned—the industry seems to
be about to make a very big mistake: We MUST speak out, if only as a matter of professional
honesty and technical credibility. And at the very least we’d like to influence the way database
principles are taught in universities and the like—perhaps get university prototypes built too. Of
course, we’d be delighted if some vendor saw fit to build an actual product, and we’re still lobbying
...




1
  We did have a “final” version ready by the end of 1994 [40,42]. The Manifesto as documented in the present book is
a considerably—but (mostly) compatibly!—refined and extended version of that 1994 original.
2
 Illustra was subsequently purchased by Informix Software Inc. and the technology incorporated (as the Universal
Data Option) into Informix’s own Online Dynamic Server DBMS product.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        546
Appendixes                                  Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


Darwen: The existence of COBOL, FORTRAN, and BASIC (not to mention C) didn’t make it too
late for Pascal, Ada, and <your own favorite language that is not COBOL, FORTRAN, or BASIC>.
True, SQL3 will have user-defined data type support and inheritance (and you can call this “OO
support” if you think those two things are sufficient to justify the use of the term)—but SQL3 will
also have SQL. With or without “OO support,” SQL is not a suitable foundation for the future of
data. “Different approach for integration?” Well, our approach is the same as that part of SQL3’s
abstract data type support (“value ADTs”) that is generally agreed to be reasonably sound and likely
to survive and appear in the next published SQL standard. However, I believe at least one of the
products you mention treats object classes as relations, instead of or as well as treating them as data
types, and that’s something we expressly forbid in our Manifesto. [Ed: More on these matters
later.]

THE THIRD MANIFESTO AND SQL

van der Lans: The next question is probably for Hugh: Is The Third Manifesto compatible
with the working draft of SQL3? If not, do you think the committee has chosen the wrong
path to extend SQL with OO concepts?

Darwen: I presume you’re talking about our approach of using the relational domain concept as the
point of rapprochement with OO, since compatibility with SQL is otherwise the Manifesto’s most
obvious proscription! As I just mentioned, the Manifesto in its general approach is compatible with
SQL3’s “value ADTs”; however, we expressly forbid anything like SQL3’s so-called “object
ADTs” (a part of SQL3 that is in any case in an immature state of development). Also, our
Manifesto expressly forbids nulls; currently, SQL3 permits nulls to appear among the secret
components of an encapsulated complex value, adding a Whole New Dimension to the profusion of
strange effects caused by these unpleasant creatures.

van der Lans: The document says “We do not believe that the database language SQL is
capable of providing a firm foundation for the future.” Does this mean we should get rid of
SQL? Or what do you want the market to do with their SQL investment?

Date: Well, the document also says “... we do pay some attention to the question of what to do
about today’s SQL legacy.” Of course SQL data and SQL applications are going to be with us for
many, many years—to think otherwise would be quite unrealistic. So what we have to do is provide
a way to migrate SQL data to D databases. And we have to provide a way of implementing SQL
operations via a D interface against that migrated data. We do have some ideas as to how to do this.
[Ed: Hugh will be elaborating on these ideas later.]


TECHNICAL CONTENT

van der Lans: In the document you make a distinction between pre- and proscriptions.
What’s the difference?




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        547
Appendixes                                    Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


Date: Well, you’re right, there’s really no logical difference at all, in the sense that it’s often a little
arbitrary as to whether a given requirement should be expressed as a prescription or a proscription.
For example, the proscription that there be no tuple-at-a-time relational operations could equally
well have been expressed as a prescription that all relational operations be set-at-a-time (or, rather,
relation-at-a-time). It was our general intent, however, that the proscriptions would add little or no
technical substance to the overall proposal; rather, they’re supposed to be implied by the
prescriptions already stated. But we felt quite strongly that it was necessary to state certain
proscriptions explicitly by way of clarification, in order to avoid some of the mistakes that have
been made in the past—especially since they (the proscriptions) are often not obviously implied by
the prescriptions.

van der Lans: Why did you introduce a distinction between relvars and relations? What are
the advantages of doing this?

Darwen: It’s obvious when you think about it. The distinction is exactly the distinction that’s
made in normal programming languages between variables and values. A relation is a value—for
example, the value currently assigned to the relvar named EMPLOYEE. When some employee gets
a salary raise, we might say that we update some EMPLOYEE tuple; whether or not we say that, the
result is that the relvar EMPLOYEE now has a value (a relation) that is not the same as the value
(another relation) that it had before the update.
       Before we introduced the term “relvar,” people tended to say “relation” when they meant the
value and also “relation” when they meant the variable, and that usage frequently led to dreadful
confusions that really should never have arisen at all. We’ll be very happy, of course, if those who
prefer to use the term “table” for “relation” will follow our example and use “table variable”
(“tablevar”? “tabvar”?) for “relvar.”

Date: We didn’t introduce the distinction, we merely clarified it. The concepts definitely are
distinct, but they’ve been very much confused over the past 25 years. The advantages of stressing
the distinction are thus precision and clarity of thinking.
        I’d like to repeat here something I said in another interview recently, for Data Base
Newsletter [62]. If I say, in some programming language, “DECLARE N INTEGER,” then N is a
variable whose values are integers—different integers at different times. Likewise, if I say, in SQL,
“CREATE TABLE T,” then T is a variable whose values are relations (or tables)—different
relations at different times. We say loosely that T is a relation, but it really isn’t. It’s a relation-
valued variable.
        In mathematics, if the value 4 is inserted into the set {1,2,3}—I’m speaking very loosely
here!—the result is a different set, namely the set {1,2,3,4}. It’s not an “updated version” of the old
set, it’s a different set. Similarly, if I insert a row into T, the original relation value of T is replaced
by another relation that includes the additional row. The value of the relation-valued variable T is
now a different relation. In other words, a relation is a value, not a variable. A relation-valued
variable—we call it a relvar for short—is a variable whose values are different relations at different
times.
        Having said all that, I must also say that it’s very difficult to get out of the habit of saying
“relation” when we really mean “relvar”! But I think in future we really ought to try to be a little bit
more careful.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                             548
Appendixes                                         Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


van der Lans: In the Manifesto, you say that relations are not object classes. You
categorically reject this equation. For a lot of people relations and object classes are both
“things you can populate,” and therefore they are the same kind of thing. Could you explain
what you mean when you say they’re not the same?

Date: Actually, we’ve revised the Manifesto to say that relvars (not relations) aren’t classes, and
I’ll interpret your question in this light.
        First of all, let me say that it’s always difficult to debate matters sensibly when there’s no
consensus on what even the most basic terms mean. In the case of OO specifically, there’s still no
universally agreed abstract “OO model” (indeed, part of what we’re trying to achieve with our
Manifesto is precisely to define such a model, or at least to start to do so). Thus, different people
have different understandings of different OO terms. In particular, different people attach different
meanings to the term “object class.”
        So we have to put a stake in the ground and say what we mean by the term. So far as we’re
concerned, an object class is a data type (with all that that entails). In other words, it’s a domain—
since we’ve already said that a domain is a data type. And domains and relvars simply aren’t the
same thing. A relvar, by definition, is a variable, not a type.
        Of course, when I put it like that, it sounds obvious. It hardly seems worth fussing about. But
the point is, so many people are getting this one wrong! This is exactly The Great Blunder1 that
some of the “object/relational” products have already made. And the implications of having such a
massive confusion at the absolute foundation of the system are highly nontrivial.
        (As an aside, I should probably mention that while many OO people would agree with us that
a class is a type, others would use the term “type” to mean “type” per se, and then would use
“class” to mean the set of all currently existing instances of a given type. For these latter people, I
suppose the term “class” is closer to our relvar notion. At least their “class” is a variable. But there
are still major differences having to do with encapsulation and related matters, which I’m sure we’ll
get to later in this interview.)

Darwen: I don’t understand why relations (and classes) are characterized as “things you can
populate.” Like many database people, I use the term “populate” when speaking informally, but I
apply it to what we now call relvars, not relations (the thing that populates a relvar is a relation).
However, I’d like to return to this point in a moment, for the justification for our position is actually
independent of whether we’re talking about variables or just sets of values, and it goes like this:
      First, we agree that a relation is in a certain sense a set and that an object class is in a certain
sense a set—this much they do have in common. However:

    ■   A relation is a set of symbol-arrangements (in other words, tuples), each of which is to be
        interpreted as a statement concerning certain things—a proposition (more precisely, a
        proposition that is held to be true). The symbols in the symbol-arrangement represent the
        things the statement is about. Such a symbol-arrangement has all and only the “properties”
        (or “behavior” or “functionality”—feel free to choose your term, the concept is the same)



1
    Actually The First Great Blunder (see Appendix B).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           549
Appendixes                                          Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


        prescribed for tuples by the relational model. And in this prescription—some might even call
        it a restriction—lie the strength and the generality of the relational model.

    ■   An object class, by contrast, is a set of symbols, not symbol-arrangements. Those symbols
        represent just things, things whose properties are not prescribed by some general model but
        rather are prescribed individually for each class. (Don’t be confused by the fact that the
        symbols in some object classes—not all!—might in fact be tuples; such tuples constitute the
        secret, encapsulated representation of the values in the object class in question, and that
        representation is permitted to change, under the covers, without affecting external interfaces.)1

       The other issue—and here I return to the point about “things you can populate”—is
orthogonal to the issue of whether object classes are domains or relations, but I’ll have to address it
now because not everybody realizes it is orthogonal. It’s the question of whether the object class
POLYGON (for example) is the set of all polygons imaginable or just the variable containing “all
the polygons we happen to be interested in at the moment.” It’s my observation that many OO
people talk in a very fuzzy way about this distinction (one that is so easily and clearly made in the
relational model that one can only lament the poor teaching, or lack of teaching, of the relational
model in recent times).
       Anyway, it matters not which view of “object class” you take, I say in both cases that it’s not
the same as “relation,” and my reason is the same in both cases:

    ■   In the case where class POLYGON is the set of all imaginable polygons, well, this concept
        obviously corresponds to the relational concept of “domain” or “data type.”

    ■   In the case where the object class POLYGON is some finite set of judiciously (or
        injudiciously!) chosen polygons that varies from database to database, well, we have no
        directly corresponding concept in the relational model, and it’s another of the relational
        model’s strengths that we need no such concept. The only “variable sets” we deal in are sets
        of tuples. If you wish to reason in relational style about your arbitrary set of polygons, you’ll
        just have to make that set into a unary relation—in SQL terms, a table with a single column of
        data type POLYGON (and don’t forget to name the column!).
             Now I’ve shown a way in which one of the various interpretations of “object class” can
        become close enough to the concept of “relation” to perhaps be useful; but this is precisely the
        one correspondence between object class and relation that I don’t see mentioned by OO
        people or products!



1
  We were a little confused over encapsulation in 1994! It is true that, as stated here, some object classes might contain
values (i.e., scalar values) whose secret, encapsulated representation is tuples. More to the point, however, some
classes might contain values that are known to the user to be tuples—i.e., nonsecret, nonencapsulated tuples (see RM
Prescription 6).
       Some of our other remarks in this interview on the subject of encapsulation are (we now realize) slightly off base
too; we decided not to change them, however, because to do so smacked too much of rewriting history, and in any case
they are mostly not very incorrect. But it is only fair to warn you to be a little careful in interpreting the remarks in
question.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          550
Appendixes                                            Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


      Actually, I’d much prefer our jingle on this matter to be “a row is not an object,” clearly
covering both of the foregoing possible meanings of “object class.” However, we’ve gone for the
consequence of that jingle, namely the jingle “an object class is not a relation” (and hence, a
fortiori, not a relvar). We opted for this latter version because “object class = relation” is the
manner in which “row = object” is expressed, or so we observe, by those OO people seeking
rapprochement but going about it the wrong (according to our thesis) way.

van der Lans: Why is it necessary to distinguish between relvars and domains? Why not
make domains queryable too?

Darwen: Domains are there before the database is there, while the database is there, and they’re
still there afterwards, when the database has gone away. What’s more, they remain—in principle—
constant throughout this time. The elements of domains are not propositions,1 and therefore they do
not represent truths from which further truths can be concluded by logical reasoning. That—
concluding further truths from given truths—is what queries do. Thus, it doesn’t make sense to
“query a domain.”
        Now, you might say it would be handy to be able to derive, say, from the domain that is the
set of all polygons imaginable, the set of all pairs of regular polygons where both members of the
pair have the same number of sides. Well, if you really want to do that, you’ll have to treat the
domain as a unary relation (otherwise, how can we obtain the required binary relation result?), and
now you aren’t looking at a domain any more. What’s more, you should ask yourself the interesting
question “What’s the domain of the single attribute of this unary relation?” Furthermore, you
should note that the relational model has no objection to infinite domains, such as the domain of all
imaginable polygons; but it certainly does object to infinite relations (though that objection might
not be due to any fundamental reason, but might merely be a useful and safe restriction in practice).
        Of course, the foregoing should not be interpreted as a prohibition of support for adding new
domains or dropping domains or changing the definition of existing domains. If you add a domain,
for example, you can imagine that you’re saying that this domain was “there” all the time, really,
only there wasn’t a need to say so before. If you drop a domain, you’re saying that there is no
longer any need, after all, to say anything about the existence of this domain (which is a reasonable
thing to say only if you no longer make any use of the domain). And changing the definition of a
domain is like dropping and adding at the same time, carrying with it an opportunity, in some
circumstances, for the domain to be kept in use throughout the change without loss of integrity.

Date: Relvars and domains certainly are distinct. Here are a couple of very important differences
between them:

    ■    Domains are static, relvars are dynamic (loosely speaking). The domain CITY, for example,
         consists of all possible cities—its value is static, it doesn’t change over time (or rather, if it
         does change, then that’s what you might call a “metalevel” change, a change to the
         “metadata,” a definitional change; it’s like changing employee numbers from three digits to
         five). The value of a relvar, by contrast, certainly does change over time (i.e., it’s dynamic); a

1
    More accurately, they are usually not propositions (a domain of propositions is certainly a legal domain).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                      551
Appendixes                                          Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


        relvar is a variable, and that’s what “variable” means. But changing the value of a relvar is
        not a big deal, it happens all the time; it’s certainly not a “definitional” change.

    ■   Domains encapsulate, relations don’t. Values from domains, which is to say values in row-
        and-column cells in relations, can be operated upon solely by means of the operators defined
        for the domain in question.1 When a domain is defined, the operators that act upon values
        from that domain have to be defined as well (this is true even for system-defined domains
        such as INTEGER, where the operators are “+”, “-”, “<“, and so on). The “innards” of the
        domain values are not exposed (except to the code that implements the operators); in other
        words, the representation is hidden. So domain values are encapsulated.
             Relations, by contrast, expose their innards to the user, which makes it possible to
        perform operations that get at those innards—doing joins and other operations that depend on
        the structure of the relation. The structure of the relation is not hidden, whereas the structure
        of values inside the relation is hidden.
             Of course, when I talk about exposing the structure of a relation to the user, I’m talking
        about the logical structure. What the relation looks like physically is both undefined and
        irrelevant, so far as the model is concerned.

      I could sum up the foregoing by saying: A domain IS a type; a relation HAS a type. They’re
not the same thing!


MORE ON SQL

van der Lans: In your presentations in London and Amsterdam in April 1994 you stated that
SQL should be definable on top of D. Can this be done if D doesn’t support “sets” with
duplicate rows (i.e., bags)?

Darwen: I’m glad you said definable—we don’t absolutely insist on it being actually defined, and
we’d be delighted if it weren’t, if “the market” could see its way into the future without needing
such an SQL implementation (but of course it can’t).
      In any case, several reviewers have raised what is essentially an extended form of your
question—“How can SQL be implementable in D, when D is expressly prohibited from supporting
(a) duplicate rows and (b) nulls?”—and I’m glad to have the opportunity to address it here.
Although duplicates and nulls must indeed be absent from D, they could be simulated by a frontend
layer of code on top of D as follows:

    ■   An SQL base table for which no candidate keys are declared could be implemented as a D
        database relvar with a system-supplied key. The frontend could make sure that the extra
        attribute needed for this key didn’t appear as a column visible to the SQL user. Similarly,
        when an SQL query requires generation of duplicate rows, the frontend would use a special D


1
  This sentence is correct, but it does not follow that “domains encapsulate”; for example, as noted in an earlier
footnote, a domain might contain values that are nonencapsulated tuples. But the paragraph is still broadly correct
overall.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           552
Appendixes                                             Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


         operator to generate a “keying” attribute which would be discarded (by the frontend, not by
         the D implementation) so that it doesn’t appear as a column in the SQL result. UNION ALL
         can be simulated by generating an extra distinguishing attribute in each operand. Again, the
         frontend would discard this attribute so that it didn’t appear as a column in the SQL result.

    ■    Nulls can be simulated by devising domains that include special values to be interpreted as
         null in addition to all the regular values. For example, the domain INTEGER_WITH_NULL
         would include (perhaps) the symbol “?” in addition to the usual symbols representing
         integers. The frontend would support the definition of suitable operators in connection with
         this domain, in order to allow the idiosyncratic behavior of SQL nulls to be simulated.

van der Lans: The NULL value has not been included. Does that mean that if you don’t know
the value for a certain attribute, you’ll assign an empty set?

Date: This question requires a rather careful response, or rather sequence of responses.

    ■    First of all, I wish you wouldn’t use the term “null value.” Part of the point about nulls is
         precisely that they’re not values. Some of the SQL mistakes in this area stem from exactly
         this confusion. (I’m assuming, of course, that you’re referring to the kind of null that SQL
         tries—but fails—to support, namely the kind that requires a logic with more than two truth
         values. I’ll leave discussion of a different kind of null to Hugh.)

    ■    Once you understand that nulls aren’t values, you’re led inevitably to the conclusion that
         “relations” that contain nulls aren’t relations (check the formal definition of “relation” if you
         don’t believe me). So you’ve abandoned the relational model, and all bets are off! This is the
         fundamental reason why we reject nulls in our Manifesto ... though we can get much more
         specific about the problems that nulls cause, if we really have to.

    ■    Your question implies, correctly, that we permit relations to contain values that are sets.
         Please note carefully, however, that we allow relations to contain sets in such a way as not to
         violate the requirements of first normal form. Specifically, we insist that any such contained
         sets be encapsulated.1 We explicitly do not espouse the concept of “NF² relations,” in which
         such sets are not encapsulated [121]. We believe we can achieve the functionality we desire
         without the complexities that the NF² notion seems to imply.

    ■    We would represent a missing value by an empty set if an empty set correctly represented the
         desired semantics. For example, if relation DEPT has attributes DEPT# (department number)
         and EMPS (set of employee numbers for employees in the relevant department), the EMPS
         value for a department with no employees would indeed be correctly represented by an empty
         set of employee numbers. But other types of missing information are better represented in
         other ways. For example, the best “middle initial” value for a person with no middle initial is
         an empty string. The best “birthdate” value for an employee with an unknown birthdate is “?”
         or “UNKNOWN.” And so on.

1
    This assertion is incorrect. See the earlier footnotes on encapsulation.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              553
Appendixes                                   Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


Darwen: “[Do you] mean that if you don’t know the value for a certain attribute, you’ll assign an
empty set?” No. In any case, the empty set could be placed at a row/column intersection only if the
relevant domain is set-valued. If the value for a certain attribute, in a certain tuple to be inserted
into a certain relvar, is literally not known, then the tuple in question cannot be constructed and
therefore cannot be inserted.
       I’m interested in your choice of terminology here: “NULL value.” We don’t have a problem
with the concept we would infer from such terminology! A value, by definition, is a member of
some domain. If you have a domain one of whose elements you choose to represent by the symbol
NULL, well, that’s fine. You must, of course, define all the operators that are available in
connection with this domain, and the definitions of the operators might or might not involve some
special treatment of the element for which you chose the symbol NULL. But there’s one thing
you’re absolutely prohibited from doing, and that’s to say that NULL and NULL are anything other
than the same symbol; that is, that the comparison NULL = NULL ever returns anything but true
(nor, for that matter, is “anything but true” ever permitted to be anything but false!).
       I’d like to mention here my conjecture that user-defined domains could provide a basis for a
sound, consistent, and noncounterintuitive treatment of the thorny old “missing information”
problem, without getting involved in abstruse and unpleasant areas such as 3-or-more-valued logic
(I touched on this point in the second part of my answer to the previous question). Some will scoff
at this notion, and I admit that I don’t see a way of treating null marks orthogonally with respect to
data types (as SQL attempted to do); but we’ve been waiting for more than 20 years for somebody,
scoffer or not, to come up with a better approach, and nobody, in our well-documented opinion
(Chris has written extensively on this subject, and I’ve pitched in, too), has yet done so.


MISCELLANEOUS QUESTIONS

van der Lans: You say that a transaction can interact with one database only. Does this imply
that multisite updates are not allowed?

Date: Certainly not. “Database” is a logical concept. How a given database maps to physical data
is not defined in the model (nor should it be). We certainly do not preclude the possibility that it
maps to physical data stored at several distinct sites.

van der Lans: Why did you exclude triggers? In the Stonebraker manifesto this feature was
classified as important.

Darwen: We don’t prohibit triggers. We see no reason to demand them, either, in our Manifesto.
They’re not an essential part of the firm foundation for the future that we propose.

Date: We did suggest that referential actions such as cascade delete might be supported, and these
are a special kind of “trigger.” But note that cascade delete and suchlike are declarative. As an
article of faith, we prefer declarative solutions to procedural ones, and of course triggers are usually
procedural in nature. So we need to be convinced further of a genuine need for them.
       By the way, I think “trigger” is a silly term. Why is our field (database technology, or
computer technology in general, I suppose) so bad at choosing appropriate terminology? A more




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         554
Appendixes                                         Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


accurate term would be “triggered procedure” (the trigger per se then being the event that triggers
the procedure). But I digress.

van der Lans: Why no inheritance on the relvar level, but only on the domain level? Did I
miss something?

Darwen: Presumably you mean something along the lines of SQL3’s subtables and supertables.
We don’t prohibit such a thing, if somebody can come up with a good model for it; at this time,
however, we don’t see any need to demand or even strongly suggest it.1

Date: Our principal concern was to figure out what the concept of inheritance means in relational
terms, and that’s domain inheritance, not relvar inheritance. I might mention that even with domain
inheritance we’re having extraordinary difficulty in coming to grips with a good model ... As Bruce
Lindsay of IBM remarked in this regard (in a recent presentation), there aren’t any good models out
there, there are only various people’s favorite methodologies. We’re doing our best to come up
with a good model, but the Manifesto still says only that IF inheritance is supported, THEN it must
be in accordance with “some clearly defined and generally agreed model.” In an appendix to the
Manifesto, we’ve begun to sketch our own idea of what such a model might look like.2

van der Lans: About the naming of the Manifesto and the language D: First of all, I would
rename The Third Manifesto; it looks too much like the Third-Generation DBMS Manifesto. I
have already talked to people about this, and it certainly confuses them. Second, the name D
sounds as if it is the sequel to C. And why do you call it a language? Isn’t it database logic,
like predicate and propositional logic?

Darwen: We struggled to find a title for the paper. It had to include the word “manifesto,” as we
do very much want it to be judged alongside the other two. We considered something like “A
Manifesto for Rapprochement,” but decided that that put too much emphasis on just one of its
themes, albeit an important one. Eventually the short, neutral title took our fancy more than
anything else, in spite of its using a word already used in the title of one of our predecessors.
       As for “D,” well, the modishness of single-letter names was certainly something to do with
the choice, but I’ve already given the main explanation in an earlier response. Do note, though, that
it’s not actually proposed as a name of a database language—it’s merely a symbol we use, in the
document, to refer generically to whatever conforming language(s) might arise from the Manifesto.

Date: As Hugh has explained, the name “D” is meant to denote one or more languages, so in a
sense D certainly is—or, rather, will be—a language, just as (e.g.) SQL is a language. (Well, no,
not just as SQL is a language; it’s our hope and intent that D will be much better than SQL, of
course!) I’d just like to add that, in my opinion, “database logic” (in other words, the relational


1
    See Appendix E.
2
  That appendix grew into Part IV of the present book, of course. We hope it is obvious that we now feel we are much
closer to that desirable “good model” than we were back in 1994. In fact, we have now revised our Manifesto to say
that IF inheritance is supported, THEN it must be in accordance with the model described in Part IV of the present book.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        555
Appendixes                                         Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


model) is a language too (rather abstract, to be sure, inasmuch as it doesn’t prescribe a specific
syntax).

van der Lans: You say that each base relvar should have a candidate key. Should you not
define “candidate key”? And what if the relvar has no columns?

Darwen: Hmm. You’re not the first to suggest that we include a definition of the term “candidate
key”; in that case, aren’t there any other well-known terms from relational theory that we should
also define?
        Regarding columnless relvars, I’ve already pointed out, in my writings about TABLE_DEE
and TABLE_DUM [29,33], that the only subset of the empty set is the empty set itself, from which
it follows that the only candidate key—and hence the primary key—for a relvar with no attributes is
the empty set. In fact, empty candidate keys are mentioned in the Manifesto in the same
proscription that mentions relations with no columns.
        A moment’s reflection shows that an empty candidate key has all the usual properties of
candidate keys. Indeed, it’s perhaps the smallest of my own contributions to the current SQL3 draft
that empty primary keys are now supported. However, although my proposal was readily accepted
by the majority of the ISO SQL committee, I understand that many of the vendor representatives
still think it was really some sort of joke on my part. Of course TABLE_DEE and TABLE_DUM
are funny, but they’re deadly serious, too.1

van der Lans: What happens to attributes if a domain is destroyed?

Darwen: No need to spell anything out in the Manifesto, here. If you say a certain set of things you
once wanted your database to include statements about is no longer required, it had better be the
case that your database no longer has anything to say about those things. No, I would not subscribe
to a “cascaded delete” idea in this context; even less would I subscribe to SQL’s scatty handling of
dropped “domains” (domains in the SQL sense, not the relational sense), where a column defined
on a dropped domain suddenly becomes defined on the underlying data type of that domain instead!

van der Lans: Why are your prescriptions regarding computational completeness and explicit
transaction boundaries “OO Prescriptions” and not “RM Prescriptions”? They’re not
specific to OO, or are they?

Date: Don’t forget that for the purposes of the Manifesto OO stands for “Other Orthogonal”!—as
explained in the introduction to the document. I agree that these prescriptions are not specific to
object-oriented, but they’re not specific to relational either. They’re orthogonal.

van der Lans: Maybe you should explain why certain things are forbidden, such as cursor
updates (or at least give some references to articles that include such explanations).



1
  That the vendors did not accept the importance of empty keys is perhaps reinforced by the fact that the feature in
question got moved into SQL4 (see Appendix F of reference [51]) in 1994, and then into oblivion when SQL4 itself
became empty in early 1997.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                            556
Appendixes                                  Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


Darwen: SQL-style cursors are not needed at all in D. However, we don’t rule out the possibility
that applications will sometimes need to iterate over some collection of rows in some order; we just
insist that such a collection be treated as what it is, a list or array (and not a relation).

Date: We do state in the introduction [i.e., to the original document] that we intend “to follow this
Manifesto with further publications describing various aspects of our ideas in more depth.” We
didn’t want the document to get any bigger than it already is. On the specific point you mention, we
prohibit cursor updates because such operations are by definition row-level, and the relational
model is set-level. Some set-level operations simply cannot be simulated by a sequence of row-
level updates. For example, consider a relvar called EMPS that is subject to the constraint that the
salaries of employees E1 and E2 must always be the same. Then any attempt to change the salary
of employee E1 (only) must necessarily fail.

van der Lans: Maybe you should emphasize that physical storage aspects should not lead to
restrictions on the update side. For example, in some products you can’t delete rows from a
table with a statement if that same delete statement refers to the table from which it tries to
delete.

Date: We originally said that D shall include no constructs that “relate to” physical storage. We’ve
since strengthened this statement to include the requirement that nothing in D shall be logically
affected by physical storage matters.
       Your example, incidentally, I think is an example of a logical limitation (it’s the well-known
“Halloween problem”). It’s just that the system is too lazy to make a copy of the table in question.
I don’t see that it has anything to do with physical storage matters. A better example would be a
rule that says you can’t update the partitioning column of a partitioned base table. This really is a
case of “physical storage aspects” causing update restrictions.

van der Lans: Where do you say that NULL is not allowed?

Darwen: In one of our RM Proscriptions (which [at least in its original form] is really little more
than a reiteration of the precise definition we offer for “tuple”). In SQL, NULL is stated to be a
“value” (“symbol” would be a better term) that belongs to no data type. We’ll allow that symbol
you suggest (“NULL”) so long as it does belong to the data type of the column in which you want it
to be permitted.

van der Lans: By the way, is the difference between a domain and a relvar that a domain has
a fixed (nonupdatable) value, while the value of a relvar can always change (i.e., it can be
assigned another value)?

Darwen: That’s one of the differences. Another is that a domain is a set of symbols representing
things that are talked about in the enterprise, while a relation is a set of tuples representing true
statements about such things. Another is that the members of a domain don’t have to be tuples,
while the members of a relation certainly do.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         557
Appendixes                                        Appendix J / The Next 25 Years of The Relational Model?


Date: As I said earlier, domains are static, relvars are dynamic (this is another way of saying what
you’re saying). Another difference is that domains are types, while relvars have types. And
another is: Domains encapsulate, relvars don’t!1




1
    See the earlier footnotes on encapsulation.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         558