                                           Appendix K

                       References and Bibliography

                            This is Appendix J in the book as published.

This final appendix provides a consolidated and annotated list of references for the entire book. We
should immediately admit that some of the annotation is rather opinionated, in that it includes
commentary of a critical nature (sometimes positive and sometimes negative). We should also
apologize for the embarrassingly large number of references to publications by ourselves; such a
state of affairs is almost unavoidable, however, given the nature of the book and of our subject.
        Note: In addition to the references explicitly mentioned in what follows, other relevant
material can be found on the websites www.thethirdmanifesto.com and www.dbdebunk.com.

   1.   Anon.: Private communication (March 1999).

        This item is discussed in detail in Appendix G.

   2.   Malcolm Atkinson, François Bancilhon, David DeWitt, Klaus Dittrich, David Maier, and
        Stanley Zdonik: “The Object-Oriented Database System Manifesto,” Proc. 1st International
        Conference on Deductive and Object-Oriented Databases, Kyoto, Japan (1989). New York,
        N.Y.: Elsevier Science (1990).

        Like our own Manifesto, this reference proposes a foundation for future DBMSs. As noted
        in Chapter 1, however, it virtually ignores the relational model; in fact, it does not seem to
        take the idea of a model, as such, very seriously at all. To quote: “With respect to the
        specification of the system, we are taking a Darwinian approach: We hope that, out of the
        set of experimental prototypes being built, a fit model will emerge. We also hope that viable
        implementation technology for that model will evolve simultaneously.” In other words, the
        authors are suggesting that the code should be written first, and that a model might possibly
        be developed later by abstracting from that code. By contrast, we believe it would be better
        to develop the model first (which is what happened in the relational case, of course).
              Be that as it may, the paper goes on to propose the following as mandatory features—
        i.e., features that, it suggests, must be supported if the DBMS in question is to deserve the
        label “object-oriented”):

        1. Collections                8. User-defined types
        2. Object IDs                 9. Persistence
        3. Encapsulation            10. Large databases
        4. Types or classes         11. Concurrency
        5. Inheritance              12. Recovery
        6. Late binding             13. Ad hoc query
        7. Computational completeness




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       559
Appendixes                                                   Appendix K / References and Bibliography


      It also discusses certain optional features, including multiple inheritance and compile-time
      type checking; certain open features, including “programming paradigm” (“we see no reason
      why we should impose one programming paradigm more than another: the logic
      programming style, the functional programming style, or the imperative programming style
      could all be chosen”); and certain features on which the authors could reach no consensus,
      including—a little surprisingly, considering their importance—views and integrity
      constraints.
            Here in a nutshell are our own positions on the proposed mandatory features (only).
      Please note that our comments are based on the premise that the object of the exercise is to
      define features of a good, genuine, general-purpose DBMS. We do not deny that the
      features mentioned might be useful for a highly specialized DBMS that is tied to some
      specific application area such as CAD/CAM, with no need for (say) integrity constraint
      support—but then we would question whether such a system is truly a DBMS, as that term
      is usually understood (see the annotation to references [9] and [100]).

      ■      We agree that Numbers 8 and (probably) 5 are important. Number 4 is implied by
             Number 8. Number 6 is more or less implied by Number 5 (and therefore probably
             important too), but it is really an implementation matter, not part of the model (it is
             what we called run-time binding in Chapter 14). We also agree with Number 7.

      ■      We agree that Numbers 10-13 are important, but they are independent of whether the
             system is object-oriented, relational, or something else entirely. (The point is worth
             repeating from Chapter 6, however, that ad hoc query support in particular can be
             difficult to provide in a pure object system, because it clashes with the goal of
             encapsulation and the idea that all access has to be by means of predefined methods.
             We note too that providing many different data structures at the logical level, as object
             systems typically do, inevitably makes the query interface, if any, more complicated.
             See OQL [17] for an illustration of this point and reference [57] for an elaboration of
             the argument.)

      ■      With regard to Numbers 1 and 9, the only kind of “collection” we really want, and
             certainly the only kind of data construct we want to possess the property of
             “persistence,” is, very specifically, the database relvar. This reference, by contrast,
             argues for the “persistence orthogonal to type” idea [3].

      ■      We think the emphasis on encapsulation (Number 3) is slightly off base. What is
             important is to distinguish between type and representation (and hence, in database
             terms, to achieve data independence [86]). After all, unencapsulated relations can
             provide just as much data independence, in principle, as encapsulated objects can [76].

      ■      We reject Number 2 outright [59-60].

           We should add that—and it is to the credit of the authors that they recognize as much—
      their paper was never really intended to be more than a stake in the ground: “We have taken




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            560
Appendixes                                                   Appendix K / References and Bibliography


       a position, not so much expecting it to be the final word as to erect a provisional landmark to
       orient further debate.”

  3.   Malcolm P. Atkinson and O. Peter Buneman: “Types and Persistence in Database
       Programming Languages,” ACM Comp. Surv. 19, No. 2 (June 1987).

       One of the earliest papers, if not the earliest, to articulate the position that persistence should
       be orthogonal to type (see references [57] and [65] for counterarguments). This paper is a
       good starting point for reading in the area of database programming languages in general
       (database programming languages being perceived by many people as the sine qua non of
       object database systems; see, for example, reference [17]).

  4.   Kenneth Baclawski and Bipin Indurkhya: Technical Correspondence, CACM 37, No. 9
       (September 1994).

       This item is discussed in Appendix F.

  5.   Catriel Beeri and Philip A. Bernstein: “Computational Problems Related to the Design of
       Normal Form Relational Schemas,” ACM TODS 4, No. 1 (March 1979).

       To quote from the abstract: “[It] is shown that most interesting algorithmic questions about
       ... keys are NP-complete and are therefore probably not amenable to fast algorithmic
       solutions.”

  6.   Jon Bentley: “Little Languages,” in More Programming Pearls. Reading, Mass.: Addison-
       Wesley (1988).

       This paper illustrates and discusses the following “yardsticks of language design”:

       1. Orthogonality                 5. Similarity
       2. Generality                    6. Extensibility
       3. Parsimony                     7. Openness
       4. Completeness

       Regarding orthogonality in particular, see reference [54]. The term parsimony, incidentally,
       is nicely defined in Chambers Twentieth Century Dictionary as “praiseworthy ... avoidance
       of excess.” Parsimony is of course related to Occam’s Razor (“entities should not be
       multiplied beyond necessity”).

  7.   Elisa Bertino and Lorenzo Martino: Object-Oriented Database Systems: Concepts and
       Architectures. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley (1993).

       Many publications from the object world try to draw a distinction (as we do not) between
       type and class, and this reference is one such: “Object-oriented systems can be classified
       into two main categories—systems supporting the notion of class and those supporting the
       notion of type ... [Although] there are no clear lines of demarcation between them, the two




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           561
Appendixes                                                            Appendix K / References and Bibliography


         concepts are fundamentally different [sic] ... Often the concepts type and class are used
         interchangeably. However, when both are present in the same language, the type is used to
         indicate the specification of the interface of a set of objects, while class is an
         implementational notion [so why is it “in the language” at all?]. Therefore ... a type is a set
         of objects which share the same behavior ... [and] a class is a set of objects which have
         exactly the same internal structure and therefore the same attributes and the same methods.
         [But if all objects in a “class” have the same attributes and the same methods, is not that
         class a type, by the authors’ own definition?] The class defines the implementation of a set
         of objects, while a type describes how such objects can be used.” (Contrast ODMG [17],
         which uses the terms type and class in almost exactly the opposite way.)
              The authors then go on to say: “With inheritance, a class called a subclass can be
         defined on the basis of the definition of another class called a superclass.” Surely—in
         accordance with their own earlier definitions—they should be talking in terms of types here,
         not classes? And then they add: “The specification hierarchy (often called subtype
         hierarchy) expresses ... subtyping relationships which mean that an instance of the subtype
         can be used in every context in which an instance of the supertype can correctly appear
         (substitutability).” Observe that they do now speak of types, not classes. Observe too that
         we now have two new terms for the type hierarchy ... Finally, observe the failure to
         distinguish properly between values and variables (note the reference to “instances”), and
         the consequent failure to distinguish between value substitutability and variable
         substitutability.

    8.   Garrett Birkhoff: Lattice Theory (American Mathematical Society Colloquium Publications
         Volume 25). Providence, R.I.: American Mathematical Society (1967).

    9.   Michael Blaha and William Premerlani: Object-Oriented Modeling and Design for
         Database Applications. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice-Hall (1998).

         Blaha and Premerlani’s book is not really concerned with the kinds of issues that are the
         principal concern of The Third Manifesto; rather, it is concerned with a particular design
         methodology called “Object Modeling Technique” (OMT for short). Nevertheless, we do
         have our reasons for mentioning it here, which we will get to in just a moment.
               OMT is a variant of the well-known entity/relationship model; like most such, therefore,
         it relies extensively on the use of graphical symbols (“boxes and arrows” and so forth). The
         book consists primarily of an in-depth description of OMT, with emphasis on its relevance
         to the design of databases in particular.1 An OMT database design does not, or at least
         should not, depend on the capabilities of any particular DBMS; Blaha and Premerlani
         therefore also offer a detailed discussion of how to map such a design to a design that is
         specific to a particular object or SQL DBMS.

1
  The book says that OMT is “especially helpful with database applications”—but this remark is a little puzzling,
because databases are generally supposed to be designed, as far as possible, in a way that is independent of the
applications that will use them. However, it is possible, given OMT’s object “look and feel,” that it is principally meant
to help with the design of application-specific databases (in this connection, see the annotation to references [2] and
[57]).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          562
Appendixes                                                Appendix K / References and Bibliography


            One reason we mention OMT at all is because it provides a good example of a point we
       made in Chapter 1: namely, that even the term object itself has a variety of different
       meanings in the object world. In the present context, it clearly means what the database
       community would more usually call an entity—implying among other things that it is not
       encapsulated—whereas in object programming languages it generally means something that
       definitely is encapsulated. Note: These remarks are not meant to disparage Blaha and
       Premerlani’s book, of course; we are only using it to illustrate a point.
            Following on from this point, we now observe that, presumably because OMT objects
       are really entities, OMT maps them to tuples in relvars instead of to values in domains.
       (More precisely, it maps classes to relvars instead of to domains.) OMT is not alone in this
       regard, of course (many other design methodologies do exactly the same thing); however,
       we speculate—and this is the crux of the matter—that it is this state of affairs (i.e., that
       “object modeling” is really just “entity/relationship modeling” by another name) that is the
       source of the infamous “relvar = class” mistake that we discussed at some length in Chapter
       9.
            We note in passing that the book uses several other terms in addition to “object” and
       “class” in ways that are at odds with the way we use them in the Manifesto. For example, on
       page 46 we find: “Do not confuse a domain with a class.” At this point the book is certainly
       using class to mean what we definitely would call a domain or—preferably—type (though
       elsewhere it seems to use it to mean a collection instead), so its use of domain does not
       accord with ours. And it uses inheritance to mean not type inheritance as discussed in Part
       IV of our own book, but instead something akin to the rather suspect “subtables and
       supertables” notion discussed in Appendix G. Polymorphism is mentioned only in passing,
       and substitutability not at all.
            Finally, the book also contains an interesting observation regarding code reuse. Recall
       from Part IV that code reuse is one of the objectives of type inheritance. Of course, reuse
       does not imply inheritance, but the kinds of reuse that are not related to inheritance are not
       new. And in this connection, the book makes the following point regarding DBMS code
       specifically: “DBMSs are intended to provide generic functionality for a wide variety of
       applications ... You are achieving reuse when you can use generic DBMS code, rather than
       custom-written application code” [our italics]. We agree, and observe that such reuse is
       supported very well by relational DBMSs, less well by object DBMSs.

 10.   George Boolos: Logic, Logic, and Logic. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press
       (1998).

       Though not the primary reason we include this reference, we observe with some pleasure
       that the title of one of the essays in Boolos’s book is “To Be Is to Be a Value of a Variable
       (or to Be Some Values of Some Variables).”

 11.   Walter Bright: “The D Programming Language” (title of a class advertised in the brochure
       for the Software Development Conference, Santa Clara, Calif., March 15-19, 2004).

       We include this reference mainly so that we can make it clear that “The D Programming
       Language” mentioned is not our D (which we first described in print in early 1995 [35]).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       563
Appendixes                                                  Appendix K / References and Bibliography


       The following verbatim extract from the description of the subject class will serve to
       highlight some of the differences between D and D: “The D Programming Language retains
       the look and feel of C++, eliminates obsolete and error-prone features like the primitive
       preprocessor and replaces them with modern equivalents. D adds power programming
       features like nested functions, modules, try-catch-finally, garbage collection, delegates,
       dynamic closures, extending C arrays to be fully dynamic arrays, associative arrays,
       integrated Unicode support, versioning, inline assembler, strong typedefs, etc. With today’s
       emphasis on delivering more reliable software in less time, D adds Design by Contract and
       Unit Testing smoothly integrated into the syntax. Guaranteed initialization, automatic
       memory management, improved reference types and optional array bounds checking prevent
       large swaths of common errors. The language is easy to parse and analyze, enabling code
       management tools to be quickly produced. Anyone familiar with C++ will have little
       difficulty upgrading to D. D has struck a responsive chord in the programming community
       and is experiencing explosive growth.”

 12.   Frederick P. Brooks, Jr.: The Mythical Man-Month (20th anniversary edition). Reading,
       Mass.: Addison-Wesley (1995).

       The source of the principle of conceptual integrity.

 13.   John P. Burgess and Gideon Rosen: A Subject with No Object: Strategies for Nominalistic
       Interpretation of Mathematics. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press (1997).

       We include this reference on the strength of the following quote from an Oxford University
       Press brochure advertising it, which might be viewed as bolstering our philosophical
       position regarding the nature of values (see Chapter 1): “Numbers and other mathematical
       objects are exceptional in having no location in space or time or relations of cause and
       effect. This [fact] makes it difficult to account for the possibility of the knowledge of such
       objects, leading many philosophers to embrace nominalism, the doctrine that there are no
       such objects, and to embark on ambitious projects for interpreting mathematics so as to
       preserve the subject while eliminating the objects.”

 14.   Luca Cardelli: “A Semantics of Multiple Inheritance,” in reference [136].

       After we had developed the inheritance model described in Part IV of the present book, we
       were interested to discover that this paper by Cardelli had previously proposed some of the
       same ideas (including analogs of our TREAT and IS_T operators and union types). It even
       mentions the possibility of alpha and omega (calling them “anything” and “nothing,”
       respectively), though it goes on to reject them. It is significant to note, however, that all of
       this work was done in the context of “the EXTENDS relationship” (see Appendix G), not
       specialization by constraint.

 15.   Luca Cardelli and Peter Wegner: “On Understanding Types, Data Abstraction, and
       Polymorphism,” ACM Comp. Surv. 17, No. 4 (December 1985).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         564
Appendixes                                                 Appendix K / References and Bibliography


       A nice quote from this paper: “A major purpose of type systems is to avoid embarrassing
       questions about representations, and to forbid situations in which these questions might
       come up.” Indeed, type vs. representation is one of the great logical differences, a point we
       have tried to make abundantly clear in the present book.

 16.   R. G. G. Cattell: Object Data Management (revised edition). Reading, Mass.: Addison-
       Wesley (1994).

       The first book-length tutorial on the application of object technology to database
       management. (Reference [128] is another good, though much less extensive, tutorial on the
       same general subject.) The following edited extract suggests that the field was certainly a
       long way from any kind of consensus when the book was written: “Programming languages
       may need new syntax ... swizzling, replication, and new access methods also need further
       study ... new end-user and application development tools [are] required ... more powerful
       query-language features [must be] developed ... new research in concurrency control is
       needed ... timestamps and object-based concurrency semantics need more exploration ...
       performance models are needed ... new work in knowledge management needs to be
       integrated with object and data management capabilities ... this [will lead to] a complex
       optimization problem [and] few researchers have [the necessary] expertise ... federated
       [object] databases require more study.”

 17.   R. G. G. Cattell and Douglas K. Barry (eds.): The Object Data Standard: ODMG 3.0. San
       Francisco, Calif.: Morgan Kaufmann (2000).

       A detailed comparison between an earlier version of ODMG (Version 2.0) and the proposals
       of The Third Manifesto can be found at the website www.thethirdmanifesto.com.

 18.   Donald D. Chamberlin: “Relations and References—Another Point of View,” InfoDB 10,
       No. 6 (April 1997).

       See the annotation to reference [59].

 19.   J. Craig Cleaveland: An Introduction to Data Types. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley
       (1986).

 20.   E. F. Codd: “Derivability, Redundancy, and Consistency of Relations Stored in Large Data
       Banks,” IBM Research Report RJ599 (August 19th, 1969).

       Codd’s very first paper on what became the relational model of data (it is essentially a
       preliminary version of reference [21]).

 21.   E. F. Codd: “A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks,” CACM 13, No. 6
       (June 1970). Republished in “Milestones of Research,” CACM 26, No. 1 (January 1982).

       The first widely available description of the original relational model, by its inventor (the
       first published description was reference [20]).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        565
Appendixes                                                  Appendix K / References and Bibliography


 22.   E. F. Codd: “Relational Completeness of Data Base Sublanguages,” in Randall Rustin (ed.):
       Data Base Systems: Courant Computer Science Symposia 6. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
       Prentice-Hall (1972).

       This is the paper in which Codd first formally defined the original algebraic operators
       (definitions did appear in references [20-21] also, but they were somewhat less formal, or at
       least less complete). Note: One slightly unfortunate aspect of the paper is that it assumes
       “for notational and expository convenience” that the attributes of a relation have a left-to-
       right ordering and hence can be identified by their ordinal position (though Codd does say
       that “names rather than position numbers [should] be used [in practice]”—and he had
       previously said much the same thing in reference [21]). The paper therefore does not
       mention an attribute RENAME operator, and it does not consider the question of result type
       inference. Possibly as a consequence of these omissions, the same criticisms can still be
       leveled today (a) at many discussions of the algebra in the literature, (b) at today’s SQL
       products, and (c) to a slightly lesser extent, at the SQL standard as well.

 23.   E. F. Codd: The Relational Model for Database Management Version 2. Reading, Mass.:
       Addison-Wesley (1990).

       Codd spent much of the late 1980s revising and extending the original relational model (“the
       Relational Model Version 1” or RM/V1), and this book was the result. It describes “the
       Relational Model Version 2” or RM/V2. (We include this reference primarily in order to
       make it clear that the version of the relational model on which The Third Manifesto is based
       is not “RM/V2,” nor indeed “RM/V1” as this reference defines it. Rather, it is, as noted in
       Chapter 1, the version described in references [47] and [76].)

 24.   E. F. Codd and C. J. Date: “Interactive Support for Nonprogrammers: The Relational and
       Network Approaches,” in reference [36].

       The paper that introduced the concept of essentiality, a concept that is critical to a proper
       understanding of data models in general. The relational model basically has just one
       essential data construct, the relation itself. The object model, by contrast, has many: sets,
       bags, lists, arrays, and so forth (not to mention object IDs), though typically not relations.
       See references [48] and [61] for further explanation.

 25.   O. J. Dahl and K. Nygaard: “SIMULA—An Algol-Based Simulation Language,” CACM 9,
       No. 9 (September 1966).

       As the name suggests, SIMULA was originally intended specifically for programming
       simulations (e.g., of mechanical systems). However, it is often cited as the very first object
       programming language.

 26.   Hugh Darwen (writing as Andrew Warden): “TABLE_DEE and TABLE_DUM,” in
       reference [37].




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         566
Appendixes                                                          Appendix K / References and Bibliography


 27.   Hugh Darwen: “The Askew Wall: A Personal Perspective,” in reference [38].

 28.   Hugh Darwen: “The Role of Functional Dependence in Query Decomposition,” in reference
       [38].

 29.   Hugh Darwen: “The Nullologist in Relationland; or, Nothing Really Matters,” in reference
       [38].

 30.   Hugh Darwen: “Outer Join with No Nulls and Fewer Tears,” in reference [38].

 31.   Hugh Darwen: “Valid Time and Transaction Time Proposals: Language Design Aspects,” in
       Opher Etzion, Sushil Jajodia, and Suryanaryan Sripada (eds.): Temporal Databases:
       Research and Practice. New York, N.Y.: Springer Verlag (1998).

       This paper includes and discusses a set of language design principles that are similar but not
       identical to those of reference [6]:

       1. Precise specification              5. Syntactic consistency
       2. Encouragement of Good              6. Orthogonality
          Practice                           7. Parsimony
       3. Generality                         8. Syntactic substitution
       4. Semantic consistency               9. Conceptual integrity

       Regarding syntactic substitution in particular, the paper has this to say:

             A language definition should start with a few judiciously chosen primitive operators ... Subsequent
             development is, where possible, by defining new operators in terms of ... previously defined [ones]. Most
             importantly, syntactic substitution does not refer to an imprecise principle such as might be expressed as
             “A is something like, possibly very like, B,” where A is some proposed new syntax and B is some
             expression using previously defined operators. If A is close in meaning to B but cannot be specified by
             true syntactic substitution, then we have a situation that is disagreeable and probably unacceptable, in
             stark contrast to true syntactic substitution, which can be very agreeable and acceptable indeed.

       As should be clear from the body of the present book, we applied the principle of true
       syntactic substitution liberally in the design of Tutorial D.

 32.   Hugh Darwen: “The Importance of Column Names” (presentation slides),
       www.thethirdmanifesto.com (October 1, 2003).

 33.   Hugh Darwen: “How to Handle Missing Information Without Using Nulls” (presentation
       slides), www.thethirdmanifesto.com (May 9, 2003).

       In Appendix G, we briefly touched on a technique for designing databases involving missing
       information according to which, e.g., parts with no color are moved out of the regular parts
       relvar into a separate relvar of their own. This presentation elaborates on this technique.
       See also reference [113].




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       567
Appendixes                                               Appendix K / References and Bibliography


 34.   Hugh Darwen and C. J. Date: “Into the Great Divide,” in reference [38].

 35.   Hugh Darwen and C. J. Date: The Third Manifesto. ACM SIGMOD Record 24, No. 1
       (March 1995).

       The first “official” version of the Manifesto. The Manifesto as described in the present book
       consists of a considerably revised and extended (but by and large compatible) version.

 36.   C. J. Date: Relational Database: Selected Writings. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley
       (1986).

 37.   C. J. Date: Relational Database Writings 1985-1989. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley
       (1990).

 38.   C. J. Date (with Hugh Darwen): Relational Database Writings 1989-1991. Reading, Mass.:
       Addison-Wesley (1992).

 39.   C. J. Date: Relational Database Writings 1991-1994. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley
       (1995).

 40.   C. J. Date (with Hugh Darwen and David McGoveran): Relational Database Writings 1994-
       1997. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley (1998).

 41.   C. J. Date (with Hugh Darwen): A Guide to the SQL Standard (4th edition). Reading,
       Mass.: Addison-Wesley (1997).

       A complete tutorial reference and guide to the SQL:1992 standard as it had become by 1997
       (it includes coverage of both SQL/CLI and SQL/PSM, which were added to “the 1992
       standard” in 1995 and 1996, respectively). The book contains numerous examples of
       violations of good language design principles! In particular, it includes an appendix,
       Appendix D, that documents “many aspects of the standard that appear to be inadequately
       defined, or even incorrectly defined, at this time.” Although SQL:1992 has since been
       formally superseded (first by SQL:1999 and then by the current standard SQL:2003 [99]),
       just about everything in this 1997 book—in Appendix D in particular—is still applicable
       today.

 42.   C. J. Date: “An Architecture for High-Level Language Database Extensions,” Proc. ACM
       SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, Washington, D.C. (June 1976).
       A revised version of this paper entitled “An Introduction to the Unified Database Language
       (UDL)” can be found in reference [36].

 43.   C. J. Date: “Some Principles of Good Language Design,” in reference [36].

 44.   C. J. Date: “A Critique of the SQL Database Language,” in reference [36].

 45.   C. J. Date: “What’s Wrong with SQL?”, in reference [37].




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     568
Appendixes                                                   Appendix K / References and Bibliography


 46.   C. J. Date: “The Principle of Cautious Design,” in reference [38].

       To quote: “The Principle of Cautious Design says, in effect, that whenever we are faced
       with a design choice, say between alternative A and alternative B (where A is upward
       compatible with B), and the full implications of alternative B are not yet known, then the
       recommendation is to go with alternative A.” Our decision to prohibit coercions in Tutorial
       D can be seen as an application of this principle. By contrast, the decision to permit
       duplicate rows in SQL can be seen as a case in which the principle was flouted.

 47.   C. J. Date: “Notes Toward a Reconstituted Definition of the Relational Model Version 1
       (RM/V1),” in reference [38].

 48.   C. J. Date: “Essentiality,” in reference [39].

 49.   C. J. Date: “Nothing in Excess,” in reference [39].

 50.   C. J. Date: “Empty Bags and Identity Crises,” in reference [39].

 51.   C. J. Date: “How We Missed the Relational Boat,” in reference [39].

 52.   C. J. Date: “The Primacy of Primary Keys: An Investigation,” in reference [39].

 53.   C. J. Date: “We Don’t Need Composite Columns,” in reference [40].

 54.   C. J. Date: “A Note on Orthogonality,” in reference [40].

       Orthogonality means independence; a language is said to display orthogonality if it provides
       (a) a comparatively small set of primitive constructs, together with (b) a consistent set of
       rules for putting those constructs together, and (c) every possible combination of those
       constructs is both valid and meaningful (i.e., a deliberate attempt has been made to avoid
       arbitrary restrictions). Such orthogonality is desirable because the less orthogonal a
       language is, the more complicated it is and—paradoxically but simultaneously—the less
       powerful it is:

       ■     The language is more complicated because of the additional rules needed to define and
             document the exceptions and special cases.

       ■     The language is less powerful because the purpose of those additional rules is precisely
             to prohibit certain combinations of constructs and hence to reduce the language’s
             functionality.

       In a nutshell: “Orthogonal design maximizes expressive power while avoiding deleterious
       superfluities” (from the Algol 68 specifications).

 55.   C. J. Date: “Objects and Relations: Forty-Seven Points of Light,” in reference [40].




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       569
Appendixes                                                           Appendix K / References and Bibliography


       A blow-by-blow response to reference [103].

 56.   C. J. Date: “Quota Queries” (in three parts), in reference [40].

 57.   C. J. Date: “Why ‘The Object Model’ Is Not a Data Model,” in reference [40].

       This paper argues among other things that (a) “the object model” is really a storage model,
       not a data model, and that partly because of that fact (b) object and relational systems are
       more different than is usually realized. The following excerpt captures the essence of the
       argument:

             Object databases grew out of a desire on the part of object application programmers—for a variety of
             application-specific reasons—to keep their application-specific objects in persistent memory. That
             persistent memory might perhaps be regarded as a database, but the important point is that it was indeed
             application-specific; it was not a shared, general-purpose database, intended to be suitable for
             applications that might not have been foreseen at the time the database was defined. As a consequence,
             many features that database professionals regard as essential were simply not requirements in the object
             world, at least not originally. Thus, there was little perceived need for:

             1. Data sharing across applications
             2. Physical data independence
             3. Ad hoc queries
             4. Views and logical data independence
             5. Application-independent, declarative integrity constraints
             6. Data ownership and a flexible security mechanism
             7. Concurrency control
             8. A general-purpose catalog
             9. Application-independent database design

             These requirements all surfaced later, after the basic idea of storing objects in a database was first
             conceived, and thus all constitute add-on features to the original object model ... One important
             consequence of all of the foregoing is that there really is a difference in kind between an object DBMS
             and a relational DBMS. In fact, it could be argued that an object DBMS is not really a DBMS at all—at
             least, not in the same sense that a relational DBMS is a DBMS. For consider:

             ■    A relational DBMS comes ready for use. In other words, as soon as the system is installed, users
                  (application programmers and end users) can start building databases, writing applications, running
                  queries, and so on.

             ■    An object DBMS, by contrast, can be thought of as a kind of DBMS construction kit. When it is
                  originally installed, it is not available for immediate use by application programmers and end users.
                  Instead, it must first be tailored by suitably skilled technicians, who must define the necessary
                  classes and methods, etc. (the system provides a set of building blocks—class library maintenance
                  tools, method compilers, etc.—for this purpose). Only when that tailoring activity is complete will
                  the system be available for use by application programmers and end users; in other words, the result
                  of that tailoring will indeed more closely resemble a DBMS in the more familiar sense of the term.

             ■    Note further that the resultant “tailored” DBMS will be application-specific; it might, for example,
                  be suitable for CAD/CAM applications, but be essentially useless for, e.g., medical applications. In




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        570
Appendixes                                                         Appendix K / References and Bibliography


                  other words, it will still not be a general-purpose DBMS, in the same sense that a relational DBMS
                  is a general-purpose DBMS.

          The paper also argues against the “persistence orthogonal to type” idea, as follows:

              The object model requires support for a full complement of type generators ... Examples include
              STRUCT (or TUPLE), LIST, ARRAY, SET, BAG, and so on. These generators can be combined in
              arbitrary ways; thus, for example, an array of lists of bags of arrays of [integers] might constitute a
              single object in suitable circumstances. Along with object IDs, the availability of these type
              generators essentially means that any data structure that can be created in an application program
              can be created as an object in an object database—and further that the structure of such objects is
              visible to the user. For example, consider the object, EX say, that is (or rather denotes) the collection
              of employees in a given department. Then EX might be implemented either as a linked list or as an
              array, and users will have to know which it is (because the access operators will differ accordingly).
                    This “anything goes” approach to what can be stored in the database is a major point of
              difference between the object and relational models, of course, and it deserves a little further
              discussion here. In essence:

              ■      The object model says we can store anything we like—any data structure we can create with the
                     usual programming language mechanisms.

              ■      The relational model effectively says the same thing, but then goes on to insist that whatever we
                     do store be presented to the user in pure relational form.

              More precisely, the relational model—quite rightly—says nothing about what can be physically stored
              ... It therefore imposes no limits on what data structures are allowed at the physical level; the only
              requirement is that whatever structures are in fact physically stored must be mapped to relations at the
              logical level and hence be hidden from the user. Relational systems thus make a clear distinction
              between logical and physical (data model vs. implementation), while object systems do not. One
              consequence is that—contrary to conventional wisdom—object systems might very well provide less
              data independence than relational systems. For example, suppose the implementation in some object
              database of the object EX mentioned above (denoting the collection of employees in a given
              department) is changed from an array to a linked list. What are the implications for existing code that
              accesses that object EX?

 58.   C. J. Date: “Faults and Defaults” (in five parts), in reference [40].

       SQL addresses the problem of missing information by means of nulls, but nulls constitute a
       clear violation of the relational model (see RM Proscription 4). So what can we do about
       missing information? This paper describes one approach: the “default” or “special values”
       scheme. Another approach, not totally unrelated, is described in references [33] and [113].
       See also reference [30].

 59.   C. J. Date: “Don’t Mix Pointers and Relations!” and “Don’t Mix Pointers and Relations—
       Please!”, both in reference [40].

       The first of these two articles argues strongly against the idea that relational databases
       should be allowed to include pointers to data as well as data per se. (In particular, therefore,
       it attacks the SQL standard [99], which supports something very close if not identical to




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        571
Appendixes                                                 Appendix K / References and Bibliography


       such an idea.) In reference [18], Chamberlin offers a rebuttal to some of the arguments of
       that first article. The second article was written as a direct response to Chamberlin’s
       rebuttal.

 60.   C. J. Date: “Object Identifiers vs. Relational Keys,” in reference [40].

       Presents detailed arguments in support of the position that object IDs are, first and foremost,
       a performance feature and should not be part of the model as seen by the user. To elaborate
       briefly, the paper argues that (a) object IDs do perform some of the same functions as
       relational keys, but they are certainly not just “keys pure and simple” (not even what are
       sometimes called surrogate keys)—they carry a lot of additional baggage with them; (b) the
       baggage in question is strongly motivated by performance considerations and does not
       belong in the model. The Third Manifesto proscribes object IDs in part (but only in part)
       because of that extra baggage.

 61.   C. J. Date: “Relational Really Is Different,” in reference [70].

 62.   C. J. Date: “Grievous Bodily Harm” (in two parts), DBP&D 11, Nos. 5 and 6 (May-June
       1998).

       One criticism of SQL is that it is an extremely redundant language, in the sense that, for all
       but the most trivial of queries, it provides far too many different ways of formulating the
       query in question (and some of the differences between formulations are quite radical).
       Such redundancies do not make the language more general, they just make it more
       complicated—with significant negative consequences for documentation, teaching, learning,
       remembering, applying, and (last but not least) implementation. This paper describes some
       major SQL redundancies in detail (including the GROUP BY and HAVING constructs in
       particular) and discusses some of the consequences of such redundancies.

 63.   C. J. Date: “Fifty Ways to Quote Your Query,” www.dbpd.com (July 1998).

       More on SQL redundancies.

 64.   C. J. Date: “Encapsulation Is a Red Herring,” www.dbpd.com (September 1998).

       Encapsulation implies data independence. As noted in Appendix B, however, we would
       rather not use the term (preferring the more traditional term scalar). Part of the justification
       for our position here is that, in principle, “encapsulated objects” cannot provide any more
       data independence than unencapsulated relations can. For example, there is no fundamental
       reason why a relation representing points, with cartesian coordinate attributes X and Y,
       should not be physically stored in terms of polar coordinates R and THETA instead. Thus,
       encapsulation per se is really not the issue.

 65.   C. J. Date: “Persistence Not Orthogonal to Type,” www.dbpd.com (October 1998).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        572
Appendixes                                                 Appendix K / References and Bibliography


 66.   C. J. Date: WHAT Not HOW: The Business Rules Approach to Application Development.
       Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley (2000).

 67.   C. J. Date: “What Do You Mean, ‘Post-Relational’?”, www.dbdebunk.com (June 2000);
       “Great News, The Relational Model Is Very Much Alive!”, www.dbdebunk.com (August
       2000); “There’s Only One Relational Model!”, www.dbdebunk.com (February 2001).

       The relational model has been attacked and criticized (and misunderstood) from the moment
       it first appeared to this day. These articles are responses to three comparatively recent
       attacks.

 68.   C. J. Date: “Models, Models, Everywhere, Nor Any Time to Think,” www.dbdebunk.com
       (November 2000).

       The term model is one of the most overused (not to say abused) terms in the IT world,
       especially in the database sector. This article was written in an attempt to alert readers to
       some of the worst excesses in this regard.

 69.   C. J. Date: “Basic Concepts in UML: A Request for Clarification” (in two parts),
       www.dbdebunk.com (December 2000).

       An attempt to make sense of the Unified Modeling Language, UML.

 70.   C. J. Date: The Database Relational Model: A Retrospective Review and Analysis. Reading,
       Mass.: Addison-Wesley (2001).

       This short book (160 pages) is offered as a careful, unbiased, retrospective review and
       analysis of Codd’s relational contribution as documented in his 1970s papers. It examines
       the following papers in detail (as well as touching on several others in passing):

       ■      “Derivability, Redundancy, and Consistency of Relations Stored in Large Data Banks”
             [20]

       ■     “A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks” [21]

       ■     “Relational Completeness of Data Base Sublanguages” [22]

       ■     “Interactive Support for Nonprogrammers: The Relational and Network Approaches”
             [24]

       ■     “A Data Base Sublanguage Founded on the Relational Calculus,” Proc. 1971 ACM
             SIGFIDET Workshop on Data Description, Access and Control, San Diego, CA
             (November 1971)

       ■     “Further Normalization of the Data Base Relational Model,” in Randall J. Rustin (ed.),
             Data Base Systems, Courant Computer Science Symposia Series 6, Prentice Hall (1972)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        573
Appendixes                                                             Appendix K / References and Bibliography


       ■     “Extending the Database Relational Model to Capture More Meaning,” ACM TODS 4,
             No. 4 (December 1979)

       Note: We give the original publication information for the last three because those papers
       are not referenced elsewhere in the present book.

 71.   C. J. Date: “Is a Circle an Ellipse?”, www.dbdebunk.com (July 2001).

       As noted in Chapter 14, the question of whether a circle is an ellipse is a surprisingly
       controversial one, at least in the object world. Consider the following extract from the book
       The C++ Programming Language (3rd edition), by Bjarne Stroustrup [90]:

             [In] mathematics a circle is a kind of an ellipse, but in most programs a circle should not be derived from
             an ellipse or an ellipse derived from a circle. The often-heard arguments “because that’s the way it is in
             mathematics” and “because the representation of a circle is a subset of that of an ellipse” are not
             conclusive and most often wrong. This is because for most programs, the key property of a circle is that
             it has a center and a fixed distance to its perimeter. All behavior of a circle (all operations) must maintain
             this property (invariant ...). On the other hand, an ellipse is characterized by two focal points that in
             many programs can be changed independently of each other. If those focal points coincide, the ellipse
             looks like a circle, but it is not a circle because its operations do not preserve the circle invariant. In most
             systems, this difference will be reflected by having a circle and an ellipse provide sets of operations that
             are not subsets of each other.

       Reference [71] analyzes the foregoing extract in detail and presents arguments—based, of
       course, on our own inheritance model—to support the conclusion that a circle is an ellipse
       after all.

 72.   C. J. Date: “Double Trouble, Double Trouble” (in two parts), www.dbdebunk.com (April
       2002).

 73.   C. J. Date: “What Does Substitutability Really Mean?” (in three parts), www.dbdebunk.com
       (July 2002).

       An investigation into substitutability and “the Liskov Substitution Principle,” LSP. The first
       part examines a couple of tutorial descriptions of LSP and finds them to be deficient in
       several respects. That examination in turn paves the way for a detailed discussion, in the
       other two parts, of the research paper [106] in which, according to reference [123], the LSP
       concept originated.

 74.   C. J. Date: “What First Normal Form Really Means,” www.dbdebunk.com (June 2003).

       First normal form has been the subject of much misunderstanding over the years (on our
       own part as much as anybody else’s, we hasten to add). This paper is an attempt to set the
       record straight—even to be definitive, as far as possible. The crux of the argument is that
       the concept of atomicity (in terms of which first normal form was originally defined) has no
       absolute meaning.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             574
Appendixes                                                           Appendix K / References and Bibliography


 75.   C. J. Date: “A Sweet Disorder,” www.dbdebunk.com (August 2003).

       Paraphrasing, RM Proscription 1 states that there shall be no left-to-right ordering to the
       attributes of a relation. As is well known, SQL violates this proscription. The present paper
       explores some of the consequences, which turn out to be less trivial than one might think.

 76.   C. J. Date: An Introduction to Database Systems (8th edition). Boston, Mass.: Addison-
       Wesley (2004).

       This book includes an extensive tutorial on the relational model and a somewhat less
       extensive tutorial on the inheritance model described in Part IV of the present book. The
       following quote (slightly edited here) is germane to the overall theme of the Manifesto:

             The term data model is used in the literature with two quite different meanings. [The first is identical to
             that given for the term model, unqualified, in the subsection “Model vs. Implementation” in Chapter 1 of
             the present book.] The second is as a model of the persistent data of some particular enterprise ... The
             difference between the two meanings can be characterized as follows:

             ■    A data model in the first sense is like a programming language—albeit one that is somewhat
                  abstract—whose constructs can be used to solve a wide variety of specific problems, but in and of
                  themselves have no direct connection with any such specific problem.

             ■    A data model in the second sense is like a specific program written in that language. In other words,
                  a data model in the second sense takes the facilities provided by some model in the first sense and
                  applies them to some specific problem. It can be regarded as a specific application of some model
                  in the first sense.

       It goes without saying that the term is used throughout the present book in the first of these
       two senses.

 77.   C. J. Date: “Why We Need Type BOOLEAN,” www.BRCommunity.com (May 2004).

 78.   C. J. Date: “The Logic of Business Rules,” www.dbdebunk.com (June 2004).

       This paper is essentially a tutorial on elementary ideas from logic. To quote from the
       abstract: “[This paper] shows how certain key concepts from elementary logic can be used
       to simplify the task of formulating business rules whose interpretation is clear, precise, and
       unambiguous. The concepts in question are described and illustrated in tutorial fashion. No
       prior knowledge of logic is assumed.”

 79.   C. J. Date: “On the Notion of Logical Difference”; “On the Logical Difference Between
       Model and Implementation”; and “On the Logical Differences Between Types, Values, and
       Variables” (in two parts), www.dbdebunk.com (August 2004).

 80.   C. J. Date: Database in Depth: Relational Theory for Practitioners. Sebastopol, Calif.:
       O’Reilly Media, Inc. (2005).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                         575
Appendixes                                                 Appendix K / References and Bibliography


       This book is an informal, but careful and detailed, treatment of the relational model and
       related matters for readers who already have some practical database experience but want to
       know more about the theory on which their experience is based.

 81.   C. J. Date: Go Faster! The TransRelationaltm Approach to DBMS Implementation. To
       appear.

       This book is a detailed tutorial on a radically new approach to implementing the relational
       model. It is based on reference [134] but covers much more ground than that reference
       does. Note: A considerably abbreviated version of this material, covering read-only
       operations and main-memory data only, can be found in Appendix A of reference [76].

 82.   C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen: Foundation for Object/Relational Databases: The Third
       Manifesto. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley (1998).

 83.   C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen: Foundation for Future Database Systems: The Third
       Manifesto (2nd edition). Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley (2000).

 84.   C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen: “Multiple Assignment,” www.dbdebunk.com (February 2004).

 85.   C. J. Date, Hugh Darwen, and Nikos A. Lorentzos: Temporal Data and the Relational
       Model. San Francisco, Calif.: Morgan Kaufmann (2003).

       As the title indicates, this book is an examination into the application of the relational model
       to the problem of temporal database management specifically. One aspect of that problem is
       the issue of granularity: that is, dealing with time measured in (say) months vs. days, or
       hours vs. seconds. It turns out that the inheritance model discussed in the present book can
       help with that issue.

 86.   C. J. Date and P. Hopewell: “Storage Structures and Physical Data Independence” and “File
       Definition and Logical Data Independence,” both in Proc. 1971 ACM SIGFIDET Workshop
       on Data Definition, Access, and Control, San Diego, California (November 1971).

 87.   C. J. Date and David McGoveran: “A New Database Design Principle,” in reference [39].
       See also C. J. Date: “Data Redundancy and Database Design” (in two parts),
       www.dbdebunk.com (March/April 2005), and “Data Redundancy and Database Design:
       Further Thoughts Number One,” www.dbdebunk.com (July 2005).

 88.   C. J. Date and David McGoveran: “Updating Union, Intersection, and Difference Views”
       and “Updating Joins and Other Views,” both in reference [39].

       These two informal papers were the first to discuss the view updating mechanism proposed
       in reference [114] and elaborated in Appendix E.

 89.   Andrew Eisenberg and Jim Melton: “SQL:1999, Formerly Known as SQL3,” ACM
       SIGMOD Record 28, No. 1 (March 1999).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        576
Appendixes                                                            Appendix K / References and Bibliography


       A tutorial overview of SQL:1999, which was the first version of the standard to include
       “object” support. Note: Observing that, while this article certainly described the “object”
       features of SQL:1999, it did nothing to justify them, the authors of the present book wrote to
       the then editor of SIGMOD Record as follows:

             With reference to [the subject article]—in particular, with reference to the sections entitled “Objects ...
             Finally” and “Using REF Types”—we have a question: What useful purpose is served by the features
             described in those sections? To be more specific, what useful functionality is provided that can’t be
             obtained via features already found in SQL:1992?

       Our letter was not published, however, and to this day our question remains unanswered.

 90.   Margaret A. Ellis and Bjarne Stroustrup: The Annotated C++ Reference Manual. Reading,
       Mass.: Addison-Wesley (1990). See also Bjarne Stroustrup: The Design and Evolution of
       C++, Addison-Wesley (1994) and The C++ Programming Language (3rd edition),
       Addison-Wesley (1997).

 91.   P. T. Geach: “History of the Corruptions of Logic,” in Logic Matters. Oxford, U.K.: Basil
       Blackwell (1972).

       The source of the maxim “All logical differences are big differences.” The complete quote
       is: “As I once heard Wittgenstein say, all logical differences are big differences; in logic we
       are not making subtle distinctions, as it were between flavours that pass over into one
       another by delicate gradations.”

 92.   Adele Goldberg and David Robson: Smalltalk-80: The Language and Its Implementation.
       Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley (1983).

       According to reference [125], object-oriented programming has its roots in Smalltalk, and
       “the phrase object-oriented programming originated with the development of the Smalltalk
       language” (though Smalltalk in turn was surely influenced by SIMULA [25]). And in this
       book on Smalltalk (by two of the researchers responsible for its design and development),
       Goldberg and Robson state categorically that “an object consists of some private memory
       and a set of operations ... An object’s public properties are the messages that make up its
       interface ... An object’s private properties are a set of instance variables that make up its
       private memory.” In other words, it is indeed the case (as we claimed in Chapter 9 and
       elsewhere) that pure objects have no public instance variables, and further that many object
       systems are not pure.

 93.   Nathan Goodman: “Bill of Materials in Relational Database,” InfoDB 5, No. 1
       (Spring/Summer 1990).

 94.   James Gosling, Bill Joy, and Guy Steele: The Java Language Specification. Reading,
       Mass.: Addison-Wesley (1996).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           577
Appendixes                                                  Appendix K / References and Bibliography


 95.   Ian Graham, Julia Bischof, and Brian Henderson-Sellars: “Associations Considered a Bad
       Thing,” Journal of Object-Oriented Programming (February 1997).

       We include this paper in this appendix because we find it a good illustration of the gulf that
       sometimes seems to exist between the object and database worlds (or communities). First,
       however, we should explain what the paper is trying to achieve. The authors’ thesis is that
       treating “associations” (or “relationships”) either as “first-class objects” in their own right or
       as some totally different kind of construct (as in ODMG [17]) compromises encapsulation
       and reusability. They therefore propose, in effect, that, e.g., the association between
       suppliers and parts should not be represented not by means of “shipments” as such, but
       rather, redundantly, by a parts attribute within suppliers and a suppliers attribute within parts
       (the two attributes in question being explicitly declared to the system to be “inverses” of
       each other). And they then go on to propose a set of rules for maintaining referential
       integrity given such a design and for keeping the inverse attributes in synch with each other.
            We do not want to comment on the foregoing proposals as such. What we do want to
       do is quote and offer some comments on some remarks from the paper that, we believe,
       illustrate the gulf we mentioned:

       ■     “A study of the literature of semantic data modeling ... reveals that there are two
             fundamental ways to connect data structures or entity types [sic]: constructors and
             pointers ... [In] the first approach, emphasis is placed on building structures using
             constructors such as the tuple or the set. In the second, the stress is on linking types
             using attributes.” Comment: From the context, “building structures using constructors”
             seems to mean that connections between data structures—”or entity types” (?)—are
             represented by foreign keys, or something very like foreign keys, while “linking types
             using attributes” means those connections are represented by pointers instead. At the
             very least, therefore, there does seem to be a terminological gulf.

       ■     “In the 1980s the former approach [i.e., ‘building structures using constructors’] was
             dominant, largely because of the popularity and widespread use of relational databases.
             In entity-relationship models there are two logical types: entity-relationships and
             relationship-relationships. Both are represented by sets of tuples and no links between
             them are stored; the run-time system of the DBMS must search for the linkages.”
             Comment: Quite apart from (a) the fact that “entity-relationship models” have very
             little to do with relational databases anyway, and (b) the fact that the phrase “two
             logical types” is a little mysterious, the final sentence here betrays a serious lack of
             understanding of the relational model and relational implementation technology (which
             was well over 20 years old, incidentally, when this paper was published).

       ■     “Attempts to enrich [sic] the relational model led quickly to systems with more than two
             relationship types. [Do they mean more than one?] This unsatisfactory situation soon
             led to suggestions to replace these arbitrary type systems with a single notion of classes
             reminiscent of object-oriented programming ... The pointer-based approach is far more
             natural to an OO thinker [we agree!], but one suspects that the popularity of methods
             such as OMT [is] because developers with a relational background find the approach




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          578
Appendixes                                                Appendix K / References and Bibliography


             familiar and anodyne. The danger here is that object-oriented principles will be
             ignored and highly relational models produced instead of true object-oriented ones
             [boldface added].” Comment: OMT is described in reference [9].

 96.   Jim Gray and Andreas Reuter: Transaction Processing: Concepts and Techniques. San
       Mateo, Calif.: Morgan Kaufmann (1993).

       The standard and definitive text on transaction management.

 97.   Mark Greaves: “From Z to A” (private communication, June 16th, 1999).

 98.   Patrick Hall, Peter Hitchcock, and Stephen Todd: “An Algebra of Relations for Machine
       Computation,” Conf. Record of the 2nd ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming
       Languages, Palo Alto, Calif. (January 1975).

       This paper was the first to recognize the important role of attribute names in the operators of
       a relational algebra; it has significantly influenced the thinking and output over the years of
       the present authors, and many of its ideas find expression again in Tutorial D. See also
       references [120] and [133].

 99.   International Organization for Standardization (ISO): Database Language SQL, Document
       ISO/IEC 9075:2003 (2003).

       This reference is, of course, the official SQL standard (known to the cognoscenti as ISO/IEC
       9075, or sometimes just ISO 9075). The standard is not a single document—it consists of an
       open-ended series of separate Parts (ISO 9075-1, -2, etc.), under the general title
       Information Technology—Database Languages—SQL. Parts are sometimes added to the
       current edition of the SQL standard, subsequent to its publication. The Parts of SQL:2003 at
       the time of publication of this book are:

       Part 1: Framework (SQL/Framework)
       Part 2: Foundation (SQL/Foundation)
       Part 3: Call-Level Interface (SQL/CLI)
       Part 4: Persistent Stored Modules (SQL/PSM)
       Part 5: There is no Part 5
       Part 6: There is no Part 6
       Part 7: There is no Part 7
       Part 8: There is no Part 8
       Part 9: Management of External Data (SQL/MED)
       Part 10: Object Language Bindings (SQL/OLB)
       Part 11: The Information and Definition Schemas (SQL/Schemata)
       Part 12: There is no Part 12
       Part 13: Java Routines and Types (SQL/JRT)
       Part 14: XML-Related Specifications (SQL/XML)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       579
Appendixes                                                 Appendix K / References and Bibliography


      The features of primary concern to the present book—see Appendix H—mostly belong in
      Part 2. Note: Reference [89] is a tutorial overview of the features that were new in the
      previous edition, SQL:1999; reference [41] is also relevant. Much other pertinent material,
      including in particular the draft of a Technical Corrigendum (begun before SQL:2003 was
      even ratified!), can be found at ftp://sqlstandards.org/SC32/WG3.
           By the way, it is worth mentioning that, although SQL is widely recognized as the
      international “relational” database standard, the standard documents do not describe it as
      such; in fact, they never use the term “relation” at all! (Indeed, they do not use the term
      “database” either; instead, as noted in Appendix H, they talk about something called “SQL-
      data,” which is “data described by SQL-schemas—data that is under the control of an SQL-
      implementation in an SQL-environment.”)

 100. Ivar Jacobson (with Magnus Christerson, Patrik Jonsson, and Gunnar Övergaard): Object-
      Oriented Software Engineering (revised printing). Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley (1994).

      A widely respected book on software engineering. It presents a methodology called OOSE
      (Object-Oriented Software Engineering), a simplified version of a more extensive approach
      called Objectory. From a database perspective, however, we do find it a little puzzling,
      especially with respect to encapsulation and type vs. class (in fact, with respect to model vs.
      implementation in general). For example: “The behavior and information are encapsulated
      in the object” [page 48, boldface in the original], but “each ... attribute [of the class] will
      become one column in the table” (page 277). Tables are not encapsulated. And: “A type is
      defined by the manipulations you can do with the type. A class is more than that. You can
      also look inside a class ... to see its information structure ... [A] class is [an] implementation
      of a type” [page 50, italics in the original]. These statements are clear enough, of course,
      but the book then goes on to talk almost exclusively in terms of classes where types would
      seem more appropriate.
           Many of the comments in the annotation to reference [9] apply here too, mutatis
      mutandis. In particular, as the previous paragraph suggests, OOSE objects, like OMT
      objects, seem to correspond for the most part to what the database community would call
      entities—and we remind you of our speculation that this state of affairs is the source of the
      “relvar = class” mistake.
           One last quote: “Most of the methods used in the industry today, for both information
      and technical system development, are based on a functional and/or data-driven
      decomposition of the system. These approaches differ in many ways from the approach
      taken by object-oriented methods where data and functions are highly integrated.” It seems
      to us that here the authors put their collective finger on a significant mismatch between
      object and database thinking. Databases are meant to be somewhat divorced from
      “functions”; as noted in a footnote under reference [9], databases are usually supposed to be
      designed separately from the applications that use them. Thus, it seems to us once again that
      the term database as used in the object community really means a database that is
      application specific, not (as is more usual in the database community) one that is general
      purpose.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         580
Appendixes                                                    Appendix K / References and Bibliography


101.   W. Kent: “Consequences of Assuming a Universal Relation,” ACM TODS 6, No. 4
       (December 1981).

102.   Won Kim: “Object-Oriented Database Systems: Promises, Reality, and the Future,” Proc.
       19th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, Dublin, Ireland (August 24-27,
       1993).

103.   Won Kim: “On Marrying Relations and Objects: Relation-Centric and Object-Centric
       Perspectives,” Data Base Newsletter 22, No. 6 (November/December 1994).

       Reference [55] is a detailed response to this paper.

104.   Won Kim: “Bringing Object/Relational Down to Earth,” DBP&D 10, No. 7 (July 1997).

       In this article, Kim claims that “confusion is sure to reign” in the marketplace for
       object/relational DBMSs because, first, “an inordinate weight has been placed on the role of
       data type extensibility” and, second, “the measure of a product’s object/relational
       completeness ... is a potentially serious area of perplexity.” He goes on to propose “a
       practical metric for object/relational completeness that can be used as a guideline for
       determining whether a product is truly [object/relational]”—an idea that inevitably invites
       comparison with the approach taken in reference [2] to the question of determining whether
       a DBMS is truly object-oriented.
            Kim’s scheme (metric is really not the mot juste, since there is nothing quantitative
       about it) involves the following criteria:

       1. Data model                   5. Performance and scalability
       2. Query language               6. Database tools
       3. Mission-critical services    7. Harnessing the power
       4. Computational model

            With respect to Criterion Number 1, Kim takes the position—very different from
       ours—that the data model must be “the Core Object Model defined by the Object
       Management Group” [127], which “comprises the relational data model as well as the core
       object-oriented modeling concepts of object-oriented programming languages.” According
       to Kim, it thus includes all of the following concepts: class (Kim adds “or type”—?),
       instance, attribute, integrity constraints, object IDs, encapsulation, (multiple) class
       inheritance, (multiple) ADT inheritance, data of type reference, set-valued attributes, class
       attributes, class methods, and more besides.
            (By the way, note that relations—which of course we regard as both crucial and
       fundamental—are never explicitly mentioned. Kim claims that the OMG Core Object
       Model includes the entire relational model in addition to everything in the foregoing list of
       concepts, but in fact it does not [127].)
            As for Criterion Number 2 (“query language”), Kim’s position—again very different
       from ours, in at least two major ways—is that the language must be some kind of “Object




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      581
Appendixes                                                 Appendix K / References and Bibliography


       SQL” (i.e., a version of SQL that has been extended to deal with all of the various constructs
       just listed).
            Criteria Numbers 3-6 all have to do with the implementation rather than the model. In
       other words, they might be important in practice, but they cannot, by definition, make the
       difference between a system that is object/relational and one that is not. In other words, it is
       not clear exactly what Kim’s metric is supposed to be measuring.
            The final criterion (“harnessing the power”) constitutes an interesting, and major, point
       of difference between Kim’s position and ours. It is our opinion that user-defined types
       constitute the primary justification for object/relational systems, as explained in Chapter 1.
       Kim’s opinion, by contrast, is that user-defined types are merely a secondary feature
       (indeed, they have been “oversold”), and they constitute just one aspect of “harnessing the
       power.” (The other, he claims, is the ability of an object/relational DBMS to act as the basis
       for “heterogeneous database fusion”—i.e., to serve as a unified front end to a variety of
       disparate databases “including RDBs, OODBs, hierarchical databases, CODASYL
       databases, and even flat files.” But such functionality is properly ascribed to what is more
       usually called data access middleware, not to object/relational DBMSs. See reference [76].)

105.   Donald E. Knuth: The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 1: Fundamental Algorithms
       (3rd edition). Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley (1997).

106.   Barbara Liskov and Jeannette Wing: “A Behavioral Notion of Subtyping,” ACM
       Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 16, No. 6 (November 1994).

       What we have called substitutability in this book is called by some “the Liskov Substitution
       Principle” (LSP), and this paper is identified—e.g., by reference [123]—as the source of that
       principle. However, the nearest the paper seems to come to stating any such principle is the
       following sentence: “[Objects] of the subtype ought to behave the same as those of the
       supertype as far as anyone or any program using supertype objects can tell.” If this
       statement is intended as a formal definition, it hardly seems very precise. (In any case, some
       degree of substitutability was included in SIMULA [25], which predated the present paper
       by nearly 30 years.) Note: Reference [73] is, in part, a detailed commentary on this paper.

107.   Mary E. S. Loomis: Object Databases: The Essentials. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley
       (1995).

108.   Claudio L. Lucchesi and Sylvia L. Osborn: “Candidate Keys for Relations,” J. Comp. and
       Sys. Sciences 17, No. 2 (1978).

       This paper presents an efficient algorithm for inferring candidate keys from functional
       dependencies.

109.   David Maier: “Comments on the Third-Generation Database System Manifesto,” Tech.
       Report No. CS/E 91-012, Oregon Graduate Center, Beaverton, Ore. (April 1991).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        582
Appendixes                                                            Appendix K / References and Bibliography


       A review and analysis of the proposals of reference [130]. Maier is highly critical of just
       about everything in that latter document; we agree with some of his criticisms and disagree
       with others. However, we do find the following remarks interesting (they bear out our
       contention that objects involve just one good idea—namely, proper data type support):

             Many of us in the object-oriented database field have struggled to distill out the essence of “object-
             orientedness” for a database system ... My own thinking about ... the most important features of OODBs
             has changed over time. At first I thought [they were] inheritance and the message model. Later I came to
             think that object identity, support for complex state, and encapsulation of behavior were more important.
             Recently, after starting to hear from users of OODBMSs about what they most value about those systems,
             I think that type extensibility is the key. Identity, complex state, and encapsulation are still important, but
             [only] insomuch as they support the creation of new data types.

110.   James Martin and James J. Odell: Object-Oriented Methods: A Foundation (2nd edition).
       Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall (1997).

       As explained in Appendix F, we believe strongly that specialization by constraint or S by C
       is the only conceptually valid way to define a subtype (from a regular supertype, at least).
       Thus, we allow a selector invocation to return a value whose most specific type is some
       proper subtype of the specified target type, and we allow an update to some component of a
       variable (loosely speaking) to have the side effect of changing the current most specific type
       of that variable up or down or even “sideways.” However, we did also note in that appendix
       that we were at odds with most of the object world over such issues (see, e.g., reference
       [123]). Reference [110] seems to be one of the few publications from the object world to
       support our position. Consider the following extracts:

       ■     Pages 29-30: “[The] collection of concepts that applies to an object can change over
             time—a phenomenon called dynamic classification ... Most OO programming
             languages [insist that] an object can be an instance of only one ... class for life ...
             However, in OO analysis, we are not modeling how computer languages and databases
             work, we are analyzing the enterprise world as people understand it.” Comment: This
             extract seems to be agreeing with us that S by C is what is needed in the real world but
             object systems do not support it.

       ■     Page 29: “Specifying the method of ... classification changes [i.e., changes in most
             specific type] is a technique at the very heart of OO process specification.”

       ■     Page 128: “A classification event is the classification of an existing object. For
             example, ... a PERSON object [might become] a member of the EMPLOYEE set ... A
             declassification event is the declassification of an existing object. [For example, ...] a
             PERSON object [might be removed from] ... the EMPLOYEE set—after which the
             object remains a PERSON, but is no longer an EMPLOYEE.” Comment:
             Unfortunately, however, Martin and Odell nowhere address the question of how such
             “classifications and declassifications” might actually be effected in practice, whereas
             our model explains these aspects in detail (we even offer some remarks on how they
             might be implemented). Of course, since their book is really concerned with object




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                            583
Appendixes                                                    Appendix K / References and Bibliography


             analysis and design, not object application programming (database or otherwise), such
             lack of specificity might perhaps be justified.

          Anyway, we are naturally pleased to find that Martin and Odell agree with us regarding
      S by C. That said, however, we have to say too that we find several other aspects of their
      book a little puzzling. Here are a few examples:

      ■      Page 26: “An object is anything to which a concept applies. It is an instance of a
             type.” Comment: This definition would certainly seem to suggest that values and
             variables are both objects. However, the business of values vs. variables is never
             discussed, although examples of objects in the book certainly include both. Value is not
             in the glossary; variable is, but it is defined as “synonymous with field,” where a field
             in turn is defined as “an implementation of a property.”

      ■      Page 143: “All operations ... require objects as variables.”

      ■      Page 361: “[An] argument [is] ... any object that is a parameter.”

      ■      Page 40: “A ... relation ... is a type whose instances are tuples.” Comment: Quite
             apart from (a) the fact that a relation has a type but is not a type and (b) the fact that
             instances of a relation type are, by definition, relations, not tuples, it is clear that (c)
             “instances” here means values, whereas such is usually not the case at other places in
             the book.

      ■      Page 15 and elsewhere: “The extension [of a concept] is the set of all objects to which
             the concept applies.” Comment: “All objects” here should probably be taken to mean
             “all current objects.” Certainly it is clear that in many places in the book the term
             extension refers to a “time-varying” set (i.e., to a variable). For example (page 386):
             The extension of the concept MORTAL [is] the collection, or set, of things to which the
             definition applies ... The set of MORTAL objects, therefore is not a fixed collection.

      ■      Page 354: “[The term] extension [is] used interchangeably with set.” Page 27: “[A]
             set is a particular collection, or class, of objects.”

      ■      Page 27: “Class is technically considered to be the correct word when referring to the
             collection of objects to which a concept applies ... Some [writers] argue that set and
             class mean the same thing. Since class has a different meaning in OO programming
             languages, the word set will be used to avoid confusion. It is worth noting, however,
             that the inspiration for using the term class in OO originally came from the centuries-
             old mathematical notion.”

      ■      Pages 33-35: “[We use] the term concept ... to mean a notion or idea that we apply to
             objects in our awareness ... A recommended term for concept in the object-oriented
             analysis standards community is type. Therefore ... the name type will be used ... In [the
             Unified Modeling Language] UML, there is a basic concept called class. Here, classes




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                             584
Appendixes                                                Appendix K / References and Bibliography


             used in analysis are called types and classes used for implementation purposes are
             called implementation classes.” Comment: Regarding UML and (especially) UML
             terminology, see reference [69].

111.   Nelson Mattos and Linda G. DeMichiel: “Recent Design Trade-Offs in SQL3,” ACM
       SIGMOD Record 23, No. 4 (December 1994).

       This paper is discussed in Appendix F.

112.   James D. McCawley: Everything that Linguists Have Always Wanted to Know about Logic
       (but were ashamed to ask). Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press (1981). Note: A
       second edition of this book was published in 1993.

113.   David McGoveran: “Nothing from Nothing” (in four parts), in reference [40].

       Part I of this paper explains the crucial role of logic in database systems. Part II shows why
       that logic must be two-valued logic (2VL) specifically, and why attempts to use three-valued
       logic (3VL) are misguided. Part III examines the “missing information” problems that 3VL
       is supposed to solve. Part IV describes a set of pragmatic solutions to those problems that
       do not involve 3VL.

114.   David O. McGoveran: “Accessing and Updating Views and Relations in a Relational
       Database,” U.S. Patent Application 10/114,609 (April 2, 2002).

115.   Jim Melton: “A Shift in the Landscape (Assessing SQL3’s New Object Direction),”
       DBP&D 9, No. 8 (August 1996).

116.   Jim Melton: Advanced SQL:1999—Understanding Object-Relational and Other Advanced
       Features. San Francisco, Calif.: Morgan Kaufmann (2003).

117.   Jim Melton and Alan R. Simon: SQL:1999—Understanding Relational Components. San
       Francisco, Calif.: Morgan Kaufmann (2002).

118.   Bertrand Meyer: “The Many Faces of Inheritance: A Taxonomy of Taxonomy,” IEEE
       Computer 29, No. 5 (May 1996).

119.   R. Morrison: S-Algol Reference Manual, Internal Report CSR-80-81, Dept. of Computer
       Science, University of Edinburgh (February 1981).

120.   M. G. Notley: “The Peterlee IS/1 System,” IBM U.K. Scientific Centre Report UKSC-0018
       (March 1972).

121.   Raymond Reiter: “Towards a Logical Reconstruction of Relational Database Theory,” in
       Michael L. Brodie, John Mylopoulos, and Joachim W. Schmidt (eds.), On Conceptual
       Modelling: Perspectives from Artificial Intelligence, Databases, and Programming
       Languages. New York, N.Y.: Springer-Verlag (1984).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       585
Appendixes                                                 Appendix K / References and Bibliography


122.   Mark A. Roth, Henry F. Korth, and Abraham Silberschatz: “Extended Algebra and Calculus
       for Nested Relational Databases,” ACM TODS 13, No. 4 (December 1988).

123.   James Rumbaugh: “A Matter of Intent: How to Define Subclasses,” Journal of Object-
       Oriented Programming (September 1996).

       This paper is briefly discussed in Appendix F, but we add one further comment here. The
       paper is among the many we have seen that fail to distinguish properly between values and
       variables. To quote: “Barbara Liskov is responsible for the Liskov Substitution Principle
       that an instance of a subclass must be substitutable and usable wherever a variable [our
       italics] of one of its ancestor classes is allowed. This principle has helped to avoid a lot of
       confusion in forming class hierarchies and affects most discussions of OO classification.”
       As we saw in Chapter 14, however, there is a logical difference between value
       substitutability and variable substitutability; the former is applicable 100 percent, but the
       latter is not.

124.   Cynthia Maro Saracco: Universal Database Management: A Guide to Object/Relational
       Technology. San Francisco, Calif.: Morgan Kaufmann (1999).

       A readable high-level overview of object/relational systems. However, we note that Saracco
       embraces (as does Stonebraker, incidentally, in reference [129], q.v.) a form of inheritance
       that is based on a version of “subtables and supertables”—a notion that, as explained in
       Appendix G, we are somewhat skeptical about anyway—that is different from the version
       espoused by the SQL standard. To be specific, suppose table PGMR (“programmers”) is a
       subtable of supertable EMP (“employees”). Then Saracco and Stonebraker both regard
       EMP as containing rows only for employees who are not programmers, whereas SQL would
       regard it as containing rows for all employees.

125.   Robert W. Sebesta: Concepts of Programming Languages (6th edition). Boston, Mass.:
       Addison-Wesley (2004).

126.   Richard T. Snodgrass (ed.): The TSQL2 Temporal Query Language. Norwell, Mass.:
       Kluwer Academic Publishers (1995).

127.   Richard Mark Soley and William Kent: “The OMG Object Model,” in Won Kim (ed.):
       Modern Database Systems: The Object Model, Interoperability, and Beyond. New York,
       N.Y.: ACM Press / Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley (1995).

       The ODMG Object Model [17] is based on the “core object model” of the Object
       Management Group, OMG. OMG (like ODMG) is not a formal standards body, but it “is
       developing standards in the form of wholesale agreements among member companies” (of
       which there were “about 340” at the time this paper was written).
             The OMG core object model is based on “a small number of basic concepts: objects,
       operations, types, and subtyping.” Note that values and variables are not included in this
       list; however, the paper does also recognize something it calls nonobjects, and gives as




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         586
Appendixes                                                 Appendix K / References and Bibliography


      examples of “nonobject types” such things as CHAR and BOOLEAN, suggesting that
      “nonobjects” might perhaps be values (or perhaps a “nonobject type” is just a primitive
      built-in type?). Moreover, objects are certainly variables, although the term variable is not
      used. But then the paper goes on to say that objects and nonobjects together “represent the
      set of denotable values in the core object model” [our italics].
           Objects have object IDs, nonobjects do not. Further, objects have behavior and no user-
      visible structure: “In the core object model, operations are used to model the external
      interface to state” (state here meaning the object’s current value). But the paper then adds,
      somewhat confusingly, that “attributes and relationships ... can be used to model the
      externally visible declarations of state more succinctly.”
           Another puzzle concerns the distinction between read-only vs. update operators (to use
      Third Manifesto terminology). OMG expressly does not make any such distinction; in fact,
      it “defines a pass-by-value argument passing semantics,” implying that operators are always
      read-only. However, it clearly also allows operations that produce “side effects, manifested
      in changes of state.” There seems to be a contradiction here.
           OMG also draws a distinction between subtyping and inheritance: “Subtyping [can be
      intuitively defined thus:] ... one type is a subtype of another if the first is a specialization or
      refinement of the second ... if S is a subtype of T, an object of type S may be used wherever
      an object of type T may be used [note that this definition seems (a) to propose variable
      substitutability, since it is clear that objects are variables, and (b) not to propose value
      substitutability, since values are apparently not objects] ... Inheritance is a notational
      mechanism for defining a type S in terms of another type T ... Intuitively, inherit means that
      the operations defined for T are also defined for ... S.” So far, the distinction does not seem
      very clear! Anyway, the paper continues: “Subtyping is a relationship between interfaces
      (types). Inheritance can apply to both interfaces and implementations; that is, both
      interfaces and implementations can be inherited. The core object model is concerned with ...
      interfaces, ... not ... implementations.” So why is the distinction even mentioned?
           The paper then goes on to say (on the face of it, rather startlingly): “Whether [the set of
      operations defined for S] is a superset of [the set of operations defined for T] or the two are
      disjoint sets is an implementation issue and does not affect the core object model
      semantics.”
           It has to be said too that the OMG model of subtyping and/or inheritance—like that of
      ODMG [17], q.v.—appears to be considerably underspecified. Many of the features of our
      own inheritance model (see Part IV of this book)—for example, TREAT, the semantics of
      assignments, the semantics of equality comparisons, notions such as “most specific common
      supertype,” and numerous other aspects—seem to have no counterpart at all.
           Finally, objects in OMG, even though they are variables, can never change their type; in
      particular, they cannot be further specialized, implying that (e.g.) an object of type employee
      can never subsequently acquire the more specific type manager. Such restrictions surely
      constitute grounds for rejecting the frequently heard claims to the effect that objects—at
      least, OMG-style objects—are “a good model of reality”; as noted by Martin and Odell
      [110], real-world objects certainly do acquire and lose types dynamically (for example, an
      employee can certainly become or cease to be a manager).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         587
Appendixes                                                Appendix K / References and Bibliography


            By the way, the singular nature of the book in which Soley and Kent’s paper appears
       should not go unremarked. Its overall title is Modern Database Systems—yet it contains
       almost nothing on relational theory, which (in our opinion) is certainly relevant to “modern
       database systems,” and will remain so for future ones, too, for as far out as anyone can see.
       The book in fact consists of two parts: “Next-Generation Database Technology” (512 pages)
       and “Technology for Interoperating Legacy Databases” (188 pages). Part I in turn consists
       entirely of a single subpart, “Object-Oriented Database” (Part Ia; there is no Part Ib). In
       other words, the book subscribes to the position—a position in stark contrast to our own—
       that object DBMSs are the “next generation”; it therefore also subscribes to the position that
       we need to deal with the problem of “legacy databases” (by which the book clearly means
       SQL databases specifically)—a position we might agree with, though we have a different
       interpretation of what it really means.

128.   Jacob Stein and David Maier: “Concepts in Object-Oriented Data Management,” DBP&D 1,
       No. 4 (April 1988).

       A good and still useful early tutorial on the basic concepts of object database systems.

129.   Michael Stonebraker and Paul Brown (with Dorothy Moore): Object-Relational DBMSs:
       Tracking the Next Great Wave (2nd edition). San Francisco, Calif.: Morgan Kaufmann
       (1999).

       This book is a tutorial on object/relational systems. It is heavily—in fact, almost
       exclusively—based on the Universal Data Option of Informix’s Dynamic Server product.
       That Universal Data Option was based on an earlier system called Illustra, a commercial
       product that Stonebraker himself was instrumental in developing. Regrettably, the book
       seems nowhere to come right out and agree with our position that (a) a true
       “object/relational” system would be nothing more nor less than a true relational system, nor
       that (b) today’s “relational” systems are not true relational systems at all, but SQL systems
       merely.
            The book claims that a “good” object/relational DBMS must possess the following four
       “cornerstone characteristics,” with features as indicated:

       1. Base type extension

             ■      Dynamic linking of user-defined functions
             ■      Client or server activation of user-defined functions
             ■      Secure user-defined functions
             ■      Callback in user-defined functions
             ■      User-defined access methods
             ■      Arbitrary-length data types

       2. Complex objects

             ■      Type constructors




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       588
Appendixes                                                                Appendix K / References and Bibliography


                ■          User-defined functions
                ■          Arbitrary-length data types
                ■          SQL support

           3. Inheritance

                ■          Data and function inheritance
                ■          Overloading
                ■          Inheritance of types, not tables
                ■          Multiple inheritance

           4. Rule system

                ■          Events and actions are retrieves as well as updates
                ■          Integration of rules with inheritance and type extension
                ■          Rich execution semantics for rules
                ■          No infinite loops

           To elaborate:

           1.   Base type extension: The book uses this term to mean that users must be able to define
                their own scalar types and operators (it uses the term functions, however, reserving
                operators for functions like “+” that make use of some special notation; it also—very
                unfortunately, in our opinion—asserts that “a data type is both information and
                operations [whereas] the relational notion of a domain includes only the stored
                representation, and there is no behavior associated with a domain”1). Dynamic linking
                is self-explanatory. Client or server activation means it must be possible to execute
                user-defined functions in the same address space as the DBMS (at the server) and also
                in other address spaces (at the client); moreover, such executions must be secure—i.e.,
                they must not be allowed to read or (worse) write anything that is supposed to be
                protected. (For obvious reasons, this problem is particularly severe if the execution
                occurs at the server.) Callback means that user-defined functions must be allowed to
                perform database operations. User-defined access methods means that type definers or
                implementers must be permitted to extend the system by introducing new storage
                structures and corresponding access code. Arbitrary-length data types should be self-
                explanatory.
                     Note: The Third Manifesto suggests that function definitions and type definitions
                are better kept separate instead of being bundled together (OO Very Strong Suggestion
                2). The book agrees with this position.

           2.   Complex objects: The book uses this term to mean that certain type generators—it uses
                the term type constructors—must be supported. (A “complex object” is presumably


1
    This claim cannot be correct (if taken literally, “no behavior” implies no operators at all, not even “=”).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       589
Appendixes                                                     Appendix K / References and Bibliography


             either a value or a variable of such a generated type.) In particular, the following type
             generators “must” be supported:

             ■        Composites (records)
             ■        Sets
             ■        References

                  Composites correspond, more or less, to our TUPLE type generator (though there
             seems to be some confusion over whether or not values and variables of the generated
             type are encapsulated). Sets are perhaps self-explanatory (note, however, that the
             corresponding type generator is not the same as our RELATION type generator). As
             for references, here is a quote: “An object/relational DBMS allows a column in a table
             to contain ... a [pointer] to a [row] ... in another table ... [The] actual value stored ... is
             an [object identifier or] OID.” Our Manifesto categorically prohibits such a state of
             affairs, of course (see OO Proscription 2, also reference [59]); in fact, we find here,
             regrettably, a certain amount of confusion over the values vs. variables distinction and
             the model vs. implementation distinction once again.
                  The user-defined functions and arbitrary-length data types features just mean that
             (of course) generated types are indeed types; hence, users must be able to define
             functions that operate on values and variables of such generated types, and there must
             not be any implementation restrictions on the physical size of (the internally encoded
             versions of) such values and variables.
                  Last, we agree with the SQL support feature, but only as an aid to migration (see
             the discussion of RM Very Strong Suggestion 8 in Chapter 10).

      3.     Inheritance: We agree with the need for inheritance. Unfortunately, the book uses this
             term to refer not to type inheritance as we understand that term, but rather to the
             business of “subtables and supertables”—a very different notion, as we tried to explain
             in Appendix G. While we do not necessarily reject that notion, we do claim that it is
             not type inheritance, and it does not provide the functionality we feel is needed. We
             also note that the book does not really address the question of an abstract inheritance
             model, nor does it mention most of the intrinsic complexities that seem to arise with
             inheritance in general (see Part IV of this book).
                  For the record, however, we offer a few comments on the features the book lists
             under its inheritance heading. Data and function inheritance means the “subtable”
             inherits both columns and (user-defined) functions from the “supertable.” Overloading
             means polymorphism (but it is indeed, as stated, overloading polymorphism, not
             inclusion polymorphism). Inheritance of types, not tables means—to use the
             terminology of The Third Manifesto—that relation type definitions and relvar
             definitions are kept separate, and hence that several relvars can be of the same
             separately and explicitly named relation type. (The Manifesto takes the exact opposite
             approach, for reasons explained in Chapter 3.) Multiple inheritance is self-explanatory
             (at least, the basic idea is—the consequences are not, as we tried to show in Chapter
             15).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              590
Appendixes                                                   Appendix K / References and Bibliography


       4.    Rule system: We agree that a rule system might well be desirable in practice, but rule
             systems are (at least arguably) independent of whether the system is object/relational or
             something else. We therefore choose not to discuss them here.

            It is noteworthy that the book nowhere discusses the debate over the equations domain
       = class vs. relvar = class (see OO Proscription 1). Indeed, the examples tend to suggest that
       relvar = class is the right equation, though the book never comes out to say as much
       explicitly, and Stonebraker is on record elsewhere as stating that the opposite is the case.

130.   Michael Stonebraker, Lawrence A. Rowe, Bruce G. Lindsay, James Gray, Michael Carey,
       Michael Brodie, Philip Bernstein, and David Beech: “Third-Generation Database System
       Manifesto,” ACM SIGMOD Record 19, No. 3 (September 1990).

       In part, this paper is a response to—i.e., counterproposal or rebuttal to—the proposals of
       reference [2]. We should explain the title. Basically, first-generation database systems are
       the old hierarchic and network (CODASYL) systems, such as IMS and IDMS; second-
       generation systems are relational (or at least SQL) systems; and third-generation systems are
       whatever comes next. A direct quote: “Second-generation systems made a major
       contribution in two areas, nonprocedural data access and data independence, and these
       advances must not be compromised by third-generation systems.” (We would argue that
       relational systems made many more than two “major contributions”!) In other words, third-
       generation systems—whatever else they might do—must certainly support the relational
       model. Unfortunately, the authors then go on to say that supporting the relational model
       really means supporting SQL ...
            The following features are claimed as essential requirements of a third-generation
       DBMS (we have paraphrased the original somewhat):

       1.    Provide traditional database services plus richer object structures and rules

             ■       Rich type system
             ■       Inheritance
             ■       Functions and encapsulation
             ■       Optional system-assigned tuple IDs
             ■       Rules (e.g., integrity rules), not tied to specific objects

       2.    Subsume second-generation DBMSs

             ■       Navigation only as a last resort
             ■       Intensional and extensional set definitions (meaningcollections that are
                     maintained automatically by thesystem and collections that are maintained
                     manually by the user, respectively)
             ■       Updatable views
             ■       Clustering, indexes, etc., hidden from the user




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       591
Appendixes                                                               Appendix K / References and Bibliography


           3.   Support open systems

                ■          Multiple language support
                ■          Persistence orthogonal to type
                ■          SQL (characterized as “intergalactic dataspeak”)
                ■          Queries and results must be the lowest level of client/server communication

           Again we offer our own comments and reactions:

           1.   Traditional database services and richer object structures and rules: Of course we
                agree with “traditional database services.” We also agree with “rich type system” and
                “inheritance,” so long as it is understood that (a) type is just another word for domain,
                and (b) the sole use made of such types insofar as the database is concerned is as the
                domains over which database relvars are defined.1 “Functions”—we prefer operators—
                are implied by “rich type system.” Regarding “encapsulation,” see Appendix B.
                Regarding “tuple IDs,” there seems to be some confusion here between tuples and
                “objects,” a point that might be the cause for some alarm; we reject object IDs, of
                course, but we support the idea of system keys, and such keys might possibly be
                thought of as (user-visible) “tuple IDs.” As for rules: We certainly support integrity
                rules specifically, of course; further, we do not preclude support for other kinds of rules
                (though such support might be regarded as a secondary matter).

           2.   Subsume second-generation DBMSs: If “subsume” here means that the relational
                model must be subsumed, then we reject the suggestion (but perhaps it does not mean
                that). “Navigation only as a last resort”: We take a firmer stand and reject navigation
                entirely; we believe it is incumbent on anyone who thinks that navigation is ever
                necessary to show first that a nonnavigational (relational) solution is logically—or at
                least effectively—impossible. We also reject “extensional set definitions” (in the sense
                meant here), because the meaning of such a set is hidden in some application instead of
                being exposed in the database. We agree with support for updatable views. Finally, we
                also agree that access mechanisms—indexes and the like—should be hidden from the
                user (they are not always hidden in certain object systems, but they were always
                supposed to be hidden in relational systems).

           3.   Support open systems: We agree with this objective in principle, but we reject the idea
                of “persistence orthogonal to type,” and of course we also reject SQL (we are in this
                business for the long haul). We do agree with the general sense of “queries and results
                being the lowest level of client/server communication,” but remark that this objective
                seems to be in conflict with the earlier objectives concerning “extensional set
                definition” and “navigation.”

131.       Andrew Taivalsaari: “On the Notion of Inheritance,” ACM Comp. Surv. 28, No. 3
           (September 1996).

1
    And as the types of those database relvars themselves, of course, in the case of relation types.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                 592
Appendixes                                                          Appendix K / References and Bibliography


132.   S. J. P. Todd: “The Peterlee Relational Test Vehicle—A System Overview,” IBM Sys. J. 15,
       No. 4 (1976).

       The Peterlee Relational Test Vehicle (PRTV) was an experimental system developed at the
       IBM U.K. Scientific Centre in Peterlee, England. It was based on an earlier prototype—
       possibly the very first implementation of Codd’s ideas—called IS/1 [120]. It supported an
       algebraic language called ISBL (Information System Base Language), which was based on
       proposals documented in reference [98]. The ideas in the Manifesto regarding relation type
       inference can be traced back to ISBL, as well as to the proposals of reference [98].

133.   Stephen Todd: Private communication (1988).

134.   U.S. Patent and Trademark Office: Value-Instance-Connectivity Computer-Implemented
       Database. U.S. Patent No. 6,009,432 (December 28, 1999).

135.   Andrew Wright: “On Sapphire and Type-Safe Languages,” CACM 46, No. 4 (April 2003).

       A quote from this paper:

             [A] language is said to be “type-safe” [if] its implementation ensures, via some combination of compile-
             and run-time checks, that the value a variable takes on or a function is passed always matches the
             language’s notion of the variable’s or function’s type ... Type safety makes program development and
             debugging easier by making program behavior more understandable. More importantly, type safety
             prevents an adversary from turning a type violation into a security breach. While an adversary might be
             able to provide inputs that trigger a run-time check, memory corruption cannot occur. There is no way
             the adversary can cause a buffer to overflow and be reinterpreted as a sequence of machine instructions.

       Comment: It seems a trifle odd to say a language is type-safe if its implementation has some
       property; if the language is defined in a way that prohibits type violations, an
       implementation that permits such violations is surely just incorrect. But we certainly agree
       with the general sense of the extract quoted.

136.   Stanley B. Zdonik and David Maier (eds.): Readings in Object-Oriented Database Systems.
       San Francisco, Calif.: Morgan Kaufmann (1990).

137.   Stanley B. Zdonik and David Maier: “Fundamentals of Object-Oriented Databases,” in
       reference [136].




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       593
