                                               Chapter 1

                            Background and Overview

This book is about the foundations of database technology. It is meant as a basis for self-study or as a
text to accompany an advanced course on databases. We should immediately explain that “advanced”!
The book is advanced not because of the subject matter, which is mostly not that difficult, but rather
because of the treatment, which is meant to be fairly rigorous and detailed (even definitive, so far as it
goes): more rigorous and detailed, perhaps, than might be suitable for a first course in the subject. But
it is our belief that anyone who is serious about database technology—in particular, anyone who claims
to be a database professional—really ought to be familiar with this material. Professionals need to
know the foundations of their field, whatever that field might be.
       What makes this book different? We feel there are two key features that make it stand out: its
strong focus on the relational model, and its thorough treatment of type theory (and together, of course,
the relational model and type theory are precisely the foundations referred to in the previous
paragraph). To amplify:

 ■    The relational model: We must stress that what we are not doing is proposing some kind of
      “new” or “extended” relational model. Rather, we are concerned with what might be called the
      “classical” version of that model; we have tried to provide as careful and accurate a description of
      that classical model as we possibly can. It is true that we have taken the opportunity to dot a few
      i’s and cross a few t’s (i.e., to perform a few minor tidying activities here and there); however, the
      model as we describe it departs in no essential respects from Codd’s original vision as
      documented in references [20-22]. (Indeed, we even toyed at one point with the idea of calling
      the book A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks.)

 ■    Type theory: Relations in the relational model have attributes, and those attributes in turn have
      types (also called domains). Thus, the relational model certainly assumes that types exist.
      However, it nowhere says just what those types must be, nor does it have much to say about what
      properties those types must have; in other words, the relational model and type theory are almost
      completely independent of each other (they are orthogonal, to use the jargon). In this book, we
      present a detailed theory of types that complements the relational model, and we explore some of
      its implications. In particular, we show that our type theory serves as a basis for a comprehensive
      model of type inheritance.

      Who then is the book aimed at? Well, in at least one sense it is definitely not self-contained—it
does assume you are seriously interested in database technology and are reasonably well acquainted
with classical database theory and practice. However, we have tried to define and explain, as carefully
as we could, any concepts that might be thought novel. Thus, we have tried to make the book suitable
for both reference and tutorial purposes; moreover, we have clearly identified those portions of the
book that are more formal in style and are provided primarily for reference. Thus, our intended
audience is just about anyone with a serious interest in database technology, including but not limited to
the following:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           2
Part I / Preliminaries                                         Chapter 1 / Background and Overview


 ■    Data and database administrators

 ■    “Information modelers” and database designers

 ■    Database application designers and implementers

 ■    Database students, graduate and undergraduate

 ■    Computer science professors specializing in database issues

 ■    Database language designers and standardizers

 ■    Database product implementers and other vendor personnel

 ■    People responsible for database product evaluation and acquisition

      For academic readers in particular, we should add that we have tried to present the material in a
way that is clear, precise, correct, and uncluttered by the baggage—not to say mistakes—that often,
sadly, seem to accompany commercial products. Thus, we believe the book provides an opportunity to
acquire a firm understanding of database fundamentals without being distracted by irrelevancies.


THE THIRD MANIFESTO

This book is organized in large part around the ideas of The Third Manifesto. The Third Manifesto—
the Manifesto for short—is a formal proposal by the present writers for a solid foundation for data and
database management systems (DBMSs); like Codd’s original papers, therefore, it can be seen as an
abstract blueprint for the design of a DBMS and the language interface to such a DBMS. Among other
things, it lays the foundation for what we believe is the logically correct approach to integrating object
and relational technologies, or in other words to building what are sometimes called “object/relational”
DBMSs. (We will have more to say on this particular topic in the subsection “A Little History” later in
this section.) However, we must immediately add that the ideas of the Manifesto are not limited to
object/relational databases as such, but are applicable to other kinds of databases also: for example,
temporal databases, spatial databases, and databases used in connection with the World Wide Web.
They are also applicable to the design of “rule engines” (also known as “business logic servers”), which
some writers regard as the next generation of general-purpose DBMS products [66].
       Now, you will not be surprised to hear that the Manifesto rests squarely in the classical relational
tradition. In other words, the ideas of the Manifesto are in no way intended to supersede those of the
relational model, nor do they do so; rather, they use the ideas of the relational model as a base on which
to build. The relational model is still highly relevant to database theory and practice and will remain so
for as far out as anyone can see. Thus, we see our Manifesto as being very much in the spirit of Codd’s
original work and continuing along the path he originally laid down. We are interested in evolution, not
revolution.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          3
Part I / Preliminaries                                          Chapter 1 / Background and Overview


Why Did We Write It?

We wrote the first version of the Manifesto [35] in the early 1990s because we were concerned about
certain trends we observed in the database industry at that time (trends that, we should add, we continue
to observe in some circles to this day). Among other things, we were concerned about certain well-
publicized but ill-considered attempts to integrate object and relational technologies. Not that there is
anything wrong with the idea of such integration per se, we hasten to add; the problem lay in the
specific manner in which that integration was being attempted. Chapter 9 elaborates on this issue.
      We were not the first writers to address these matters. In fact, one of our original aims in writing
The Third Manifesto was to respond to two earlier ones (hence our choice of title):

 ■    “The Object-Oriented Database System Manifesto” [2]

 ■    “The Third-Generation Database System Manifesto” [130]

Like our own Manifesto, each of these documents proposed a basis on which to build DBMSs.
However:

 ■    The first essentially ignored the relational model. In our opinion, this flaw was more than enough
      to rule it out as a serious contender. In any case, it seemed to us that it failed to give firm
      direction.

 ■    The second did correctly embrace the relational model, but failed to emphasize (or indeed even
      mention) the hopelessness of continuing to follow a commonly accepted perversion of that
      model—namely, SQL—in pursuit of relational ideals. In other words, it simply assumed that
      SQL, with all its faults, was (and is) an adequate realization of the relational model and hence an
      adequate foundation on which to build.

       Regarding SQL in particular, we feel that any attempt to move forward, if it is to stand the test of
time, must reject SQL unequivocally. Our reasons for taking this position are too many and varied for
us to spell them out in detail here; in any case, we have described them in depth in many other places
(see, e.g., references [27], [41], [44-45], [51], and [62] among others if you want more specifics). Of
course, we do realize that SQL databases and applications are going to be with us for a long time—to
think otherwise would be quite unrealistic—and so we do have to pay some attention to the question of
what to do about today’s SQL legacy. The Manifesto therefore does include some specific suggestions
in this regard (see Chapter 10 for a detailed discussion).
       Further analysis of the proposals of references [2] and [130] can be found in the annotation to
those references in Appendix K. Also, a detailed examination of how SQL measures up to the ideas of
the Manifesto can be found in Appendix H.

What Problem Were We Trying to Solve?

We need to explain what problem we were trying to solve when we first wrote our Manifesto. (What
follows is an edited version of what we said at that time.) It was our belief—borne out by subsequent
events—that DBMSs needed to evolve to deal with much more sophisticated kinds of data than they




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           4
Part I / Preliminaries                                          Chapter 1 / Background and Overview


were capable of at the time; in other words, we needed to find a way of extending, dramatically, the
range of possible kinds of data we could keep in our databases. For example, we might imagine a
biological database that included a BIRD relation like the one shown in Fig. 1.1. Note: We follow
convention in Fig. 1.1 and similar figures throughout this book in using double underlining to mark
components of primary keys—despite the fact that (as we will see in the next chapter) the Manifesto
does not require primary key support.
╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║           ┌────────┬───────┬─────┬───────┬──────┬──────┐        ║
║      BIRD │ NAME   │ DESCR │ PIC │ VIDEO │ SONG │ MIGR │        ║
║           ├════════┼───────┼─────┼───────┼──────┼──────┤        ║
║           │ Robin │ xxxxx │ ... │ ..... │ ♪♫♪♫ │ .... │         ║
║           │ Osprey │ xxxxx │ ... │ ..... │ ♪♪♪♪ │ .... │        ║
║           │ ...... │ ..... │ ... │ ..... │ .... │ .... │        ║
║                                                                 ║
║      where NAME is a bird name                    (text)        ║
║      and   DESCR is a description of that bird    (XML doc)     ║
║      and   PIC   is a picture of the bird         (photo)       ║
║      and   VIDEO is a movie of the bird           (video)       ║
║      and   SONG is the bird's song                (audio)       ║
║      and   MIGR is the bird's migration route     (map)         ║
║                                                                 ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 1.1: The BIRD relation

       Before going any further, we should make it clear that, strictly speaking, the table in Fig. 1.1 is
not really a relation at all, even though we said it was just now. Rather, it is a picture of a relation, as
displayed on a computer screen perhaps, that contains among other things certain icons. Clicking on,
say, the SONG (“♪♫♪♫”) icon in the Robin row in that picture might cause the system to play a
recording of a robin singing; and, loosely speaking, it is that recording, not the icon, that is the actual
value of the SONG component of the Robin row within the BIRD relation.
       To get back to the main thread of our discussion: Of course, we would need to be able to operate
on such new kinds of data, too. In the case of the BIRD relation, for example, we might want to find
information concerning birds whose migration route includes Italy:
      SELECT NAME, DESCR, SONG, VIDEO
      FROM   BIRD
      WHERE INCLUDES ( MIGR, COUNTRY('Italy') )

Note: We use SQL as the basis for this example for reasons of familiarity, despite the fact that (as
indicated in the previous subsection) the Manifesto expressly proscribes it.
        So the problem we were addressing was this: How could we support new kinds of data within the
classical relational framework? (Of course, we did take it as axiomatic that we wanted to stay in that
framework; it would be unthinkable to walk away from what is, at the time of writing, well over 35
years of relational research and development.) And the key to the solution was, of course, type theory:
It all boiled down to the issue of what types of data we were allowed to keep within database relations.
Hence our focus on type theory in this book.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            5
Part I / Preliminaries                                                  Chapter 1 / Background and Overview


Topics Deliberately Omitted

As you know by now, this book is not about SQL (at least, not directly). Nor is it about commercial
products. Rather, it is about principles (in this context, just another word for foundations). Why?
Because principles endure;1 principles are solid; principles are what you need to know in order to be
able to understand—and analyze, and evaluate, and perhaps judge—vendor claims, commercial
products, the SQL language, and numerous other developments and pronouncements in the database
field.
       Of course, a real DBMS will necessarily include many features over and above those that can
properly be regarded as foundation features as such. Such features include:

    ■    Recovery and concurrency controls

    ■    Security and authorization controls

    ■    Stored and triggered procedures (the latter more usually known, somewhat inappropriately, as just
         triggers)

    ■    Support for the development of generic applications (e.g., some kind of call-level interface)

    ■    Performance tuning and other administration controls

and many other things besides. Now, we recognize that such features can be extremely important in
practice—in fact, the quality of support for them can make or break a DBMS as a commercial
proposition. As already stated, however, they are not part of the foundation per se; they are therefore
not addressed in the Manifesto, and they are not discussed in the present book (at least, not much).
      We also have little to say regarding matters of implementation. As explained in more detail in the
section “Some Crucial Logical Differences” later in this chapter, we draw a sharp distinction between
model issues and implementation ones, and we believe it is important to get the model right first before
worrying about how to implement it—though we should immediately add that we have at least thought
about implementation matters enough to have reason to believe that everything we propose is indeed
implementable.2 In particular, much existing SQL implementation technology should be useful and
usable in implementing the ideas of the Manifesto, even though we reject SQL as such. (In fact, we
venture to suggest that implementing the Manifesto should actually be easier than implementing SQL,
for reasons we hope will become clear as we proceed.)




1
    By contrast, products change all the time, and so does SQL.
2
  In this respect, we might again claim to be following Codd, who wrote, possibly tongue in cheek, in his famous 1970
paper [21]: “Implementation problems are [not] discussed. Nevertheless, the material presented should be adequate for
experienced systems programmers to visualize several approaches.”




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                         6
Part I / Preliminaries                                                     Chapter 1 / Background and Overview


What about Objects?

Something else we need to explain at the outset has to do with our adoption—or lack thereof, rather, for
the most part—of terminology from the object world.1 In the early to mid 1990s, there were those who
argued that object technology was destined to replace relational technology. Few now subscribe to that
position, but it might still be claimed that object technology at least does have some contributions to
make to the database field. We do not dispute that claim; however, we prefer not to use object
terminology, even when we make use of object concepts (or, at least, concepts that might have some
counterpart in the object world), because we do not find that terminology appropriate to our purpose.
For consider:

    ■    First of all, the very term object itself does not seem to have a precise or universally agreed
         meaning. Sometimes it seems to mean a value; sometimes a variable; sometimes even a type;
         and there might be other interpretations as well. (Sometimes an object is defined to be an
         instance, but that definition merely shifts the question of interpretation on to this latter term. In
         this book, therefore, we avoid the use of the term instance also, except in very informal contexts.)

    ■    As a label, moreover, that same term object is applied to a wide variety of quite distinct
         endeavors. It is used among other things to describe a certain graphic interface style, a certain
         programming style, certain programming languages (not the same thing as programming style, of
         course), and certain analysis and design techniques—all of these in addition to a certain approach
         to what is after all the principal focus of this book, database management. And it is quite clear
         that the term does not mean the same thing in all of these different contexts (see, e.g., the
         annotation to reference [9] in Appendix K).

       Similar comments apply to other object terms as well (class, method, and so on). Given this state
of affairs, therefore, and given also that we are trying to be precise in this book (for the most part, at
any rate), we prefer to avoid terminology that might be subject to misinterpretation.
       There is another point we need to make clear in this connection, though. In this book, we are (of
course) interested in the field of database management. We are therefore interested in—among many
other things—the applicability of object concepts and technology to that field. Please note, therefore,
that all remarks made in this book concerning object concepts and technology must be understood in
this light. We offer no opinion whatsoever regarding the usefulness of object ideas in any other
context.

A Little History

Being organized as it is around The Third Manifesto, this book can be seen as a reincarnation of, and
replacement for, two previous books (though it has been drastically revised, and in fact totally
rewritten). The first of those previous books was published in 1998, under the title Foundation for
Object/Relational Databases: The Third Manifesto [82]. We chose that title because “object/relational”
DBMSs were a hot topic at the time; we were concerned in particular that certain portions of the
industry were going about implementing such DBMSs in a way that seemed to us seriously flawed, and

1
    Throughout this book we favor the abbreviated form object over the longer term object-oriented.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                 7
Part I / Preliminaries                                         Chapter 1 / Background and Overview


we wanted to do our best to help correct matters. In retrospect, however, we now realize the title was a
little unfortunate in at least two respects:

 ■    It got the emphasis wrong, in that it suggested that the book was concerned with
      “object/relational” databases exclusively, whereas (as already indicated) the ideas of the
      Manifesto are much wider-ranging.

 ■    In any case, we regard “object/relational” primarily as a marketing term. Indeed, it is our
      contention that a true relational system—that is, a system that supported the relational model
      properly, with all that such support entails—would in fact be an “object/relational” system (which
      is why we usually set the term in quotation marks).

      We went on to publish a revised version of that first book in 2000 under the somewhat better title
Foundation for Future Database Systems: The Third Manifesto [83]. But that title too was not perfect.
The problem with the future is, it never arrives!—and we would like to see the industry in general act
on the ideas of the Manifesto as soon as possible (we take this subject seriously). Certainly there is
room for improvement in the current crop of commercial products.
      And so to the present book. This time we have chosen what we hope is a more appropriate title;
in particular, we have tried to get away from the shortcomings of the two earlier titles. And we have, as
already indicated, taken the opportunity to overhaul the text from beginning to end. Thus, although the
overall message remains unchanged, what you hold in your hands is to all intents and purposes a brand
new book.


BACK TO THE RELATIONAL FUTURE

It is a major thesis of both the Manifesto and this book that we need to move away from SQL and get
back to our relational roots. In other words, we do not believe that SQL is capable of providing the
kind of solid foundation we seek. Rather, we believe any such foundation must be firmly rooted in the
relational model of data, first presented to the world in 1969 by E. F. Codd in reference [20].
        Now, we have already said we acknowledge the desirability of supporting certain features that are
commonly regarded as aspects of object orientation. However, we believe the features in question are
orthogonal to (i.e., independent of) the relational model as such. In other words, we claim that the
relational model needs no extension, no correction, no subsumption—and, above all, no perversion—in
order for it to be possible to define some database language that (a) is truly relational, (b) does
accommodate those desirable orthogonal features, and (c) can represent the firm foundation we seek.
        Let there be such a language, and let its name be D. Please note immediately that no special
significance attaches to this choice of name—we use it merely to refer generically to any language that
conforms to the principles laid down in the Manifesto. There could be any number of distinct
languages all qualifying as a valid D. We define one such language in this book; we call it Tutorial D,
and we use it as the basis for most of our examples.
        The Manifesto defines a variety of prescriptions and proscriptions that apply to any such D.
Some of those prescriptions arise from the relational model, and these we call Relational Model
Prescriptions (RM Prescriptions). Prescriptions that do not arise from the relational model we call
Other Orthogonal Prescriptions (OO Prescriptions). We similarly classify the Manifesto’s




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         8
Part I / Preliminaries                                                     Chapter 1 / Background and Overview


proscriptions into RM and OO categories. The various prescriptions and proscriptions are itemized and
discussed in detail in Parts II and III of this book.
        In addition to the prescriptions and proscriptions just mentioned, the Manifesto includes a series
of Very Strong Suggestions, likewise divided into RM and OO categories; again, see Parts II and III.
Also, Part IV contains the definition of a model of type inheritance, and that model is likewise
formulated as a series of prescriptions—Inheritance Model Prescriptions (IM Prescriptions). Please
note, however, that almost everything to do with that inheritance model is ignored prior to Part IV,
except for the occasional remark here and there. The material of Part IV extends, but does not
invalidate, the material presented in earlier parts of the book.
        For definiteness, we assume throughout the Manifesto and throughout this book that the language
D is imperative in style. Like all such languages, therefore, it is based on the four core concepts type,
value, variable, and operator.1 For example, we might have a type called INTEGER; the integer 3
might be a value of that type; N might be a variable of that type, whose value at any given time is some
integer value (i.e., some value of that type); and plus might be an operator that applies to integer values
(i.e., to values of that type). See the section “Some Crucial Logical Differences” later in this chapter
for further elaboration of these concepts.
        As an aside, we remark that if it is true that the Manifesto can be regarded as defining a
foundation for database technology, then the concepts of type, value, variable, and operator can be
regarded as providing a foundation for that foundation. And since the value, variable, and operator
concepts in turn all rely on the type concept, we might go further and say the type concept can be
regarded as a foundation for the foundation for the foundation ... In other words, the type concept is the
most fundamental of all, as we will soon see.
        Back to the language D. We have said that D is imperative in style (or so we will assume). Now,
some writers equate the term imperative with the term procedural, but we do not (even though they
both refer to a style of programming in which the programmer explicitly directs the computer to carry
out certain processes). Actually, neither term is very precisely defined; however, procedural usually
connotes a rather low level of abstraction, while imperative does not (at least, not necessarily). In other
words, procedural languages are imperative, but imperative languages are not necessarily procedural.
In particular, the language D—or its relational portion, at any rate—is at a comparatively high level of
abstraction and is thus imperative but not procedural.
        One last point to close this section: Do not infer from our assumption of an imperative style that
we discount the possibility of (e.g.) a functional style; at the time of writing, however, we have not
investigated such a possibility in any depth. But we should point out that certain of the prescriptions,
proscriptions, and suggestions spelled out in this book would have to be reformulated in the context of a
functional D. For example, a functional D would obviously have no need of variables at all, in the
usual programming sense of that term, and hence would not need any update operators either.




1
  Note that we distinguish between operators and operations—an operation is the process carried out when an operator is
invoked. That said, however, we should say too that the terms can often be used interchangeably. For example, no real
harm is done if we replace “operator” by “operation” in the sentence “Plus is an operator that takes two integers as input and
returns another integer as output.”




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             9
Part I / Preliminaries                                                    Chapter 1 / Background and Overview


SOME GUIDING PRINCIPLES

Throughout our work on the Manifesto (and related work), we have tried to follow certain guiding
principles, of which the most important—indeed, it underpins all the rest—is this:

                                     All logical differences are big differences.

The relevance of this maxim, which is due to Wittgenstein [91], is as follows. The relational model is
at heart a formal system: just as a DBMS is, or an operating system (or indeed any computer program,
come to that). Formal systems are what computers are, or can be made to be, good at. And, of course,
the basis of any formal system is logic. It follows that with respect to formal systems in general, and
with respect to the matters that are the concern of the Manifesto in particular, differences that are
logical in nature are very important ones, and we need to pay very careful attention to them.
       Incidentally, we might point out, slightly tongue in cheek, that Wittgenstein’s maxim has an
interesting corollary: namely, that all logical mistakes are big mistakes. Because, of course, a mistake
is a difference—a difference between what is right and what is wrong. And we do unfortunately
observe a number of logical mistakes that have been made, and still are being made, in the industry as a
whole ...
       We further conjecture that the inverse of Wittgenstein’s maxim is true as well: namely, that all
nonlogical differences are small differences—by which we mean, not that (e.g.) psychological
differences are unimportant in general, but that they are unimportant from the point of view of formal
systems in particular. In the context of the Manifesto specifically, therefore, we pay little attention to
nonlogical considerations, such as matters of syntax. (Syntax is important from a human factors point
of view, of course, and in our design of Tutorial D in particular we have naturally tried to favor good
syntax over bad. However, we do not regard differences that are mere differences in syntax as logical
differences, nor as very important ones.)
       Another fundamental principle we have tried to follow is that of conceptual integrity (the term is
due to Fred Brooks). In his classic The Mythical Man-Month [12], Brooks has this to say:

      [Conceptual] integrity is the most important consideration in system design. It is better to have a system omit certain
      anomalous features [and] to reflect one set of design ideas, than to have one that contains many good but independent
      and uncoordinated ideas [italics in the original].

And writing 20 years later, he adds:

      A clean, elegant programming product must present ... a coherent mental model ... [Conceptual] integrity ... is the
      most important factor in ease of use ... Today I am more convinced than ever. Conceptual integrity is central to
      product quality [boldface and italics in the original].

       Let us elaborate briefly on this question of conceptual integrity. In order to maintain integrity of
concepts, it is clearly necessary to have some concepts in the first place. Furthermore, the concepts in
question had better be carefully chosen, preferably few in number, agreed upon by all parties
concerned, and indeed agreeable, not disagreeable, in nature. As an obvious example, suppose the
product in question is a DBMS specifically, and suppose the agreed-upon concepts are those of the
relational model. Then that product must adhere rigidly to all aspects of that model. In particular, it




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          10
Part I / Preliminaries                                                    Chapter 1 / Background and Overview


must not sacrifice the conceptual integrity of that model to some vaguely defined goal such as “keeping
the syntax simple” [31].
      We will have occasion to refer to these guiding principles many times over in the pages ahead.


SOME CRUCIAL LOGICAL DIFFERENCES

The following logical differences are worth examining right away, since they are relevant to just about
everything to be discussed in this book:

    ■   Model vs. implementation

    ■   Value vs. variable

    ■   Value vs. appearance

Many others will be identified in the chapters to come. See also reference [79].

Model vs. Implementation

The first logical difference we want to discuss is that between model and implementation. First some
definitions:

    ■   A model (sometimes referred to as a data model specifically) is an abstract, self-contained,
        logical definition of the objects, operators, and so forth, that together constitute the abstract
        machine with which users interact.1 The objects allow us to model the structure of data. The
        operators allow us to model its behavior. Note: The term objects here is to be understood in its
        generic sense, not in the special sense of object orientation. Also, the term users, here and
        elsewhere throughout this book, is intended to mean end users and/or application programmers
        and/or transactions, as the context demands.

    ■   An implementation of a given model is a physical realization on a real computer system of the
        components of the abstract machine that together constitute that model. Note: The term
        implementation, here and elsewhere throughout this book, is to be understood to mean
        implementation of “the system” (i.e., the DBMS itself), not implementation of some application
        that runs on top of the DBMS.

       As you can see, the distinction between model and implementation is really just an important
special case of the familiar distinction between logical and physical aspects of a system. And just in
case it might not be obvious, we would like to make it clear that our primary concern throughout the


1
  The term architecture is sometimes used with much the same meaning. To quote Brooks once again, “the architecture of a
system [is] the complete and detailed specification of the user interface” [12]. We prefer model to architecture because over
the years the latter term has grown to acquire a variety of meanings, most of them not very precise. (In fairness, we should
admit that the same is also true of the term model to some extent [68]; certainly the term data model in particular has two
very different meanings. See the annotation to reference [76] in Appendix K.)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          11
Part I / Preliminaries                                                     Chapter 1 / Background and Overview


Manifesto, and throughout this book, is with the model specifically, not the implementation (though our
informal discussions and explanations do occasionally touch on matters of implementation for purposes
of clarification).
      Observe, incidentally, that keeping the model and its implementation rigorously separate—in
particular, not cluttering up the model with implementation matters—is what enables us to achieve data
independence [76,86]. Indeed, we fail to achieve that objective precisely to the extent that we fail to
observe that separation.

Value vs. Variable

The second logical difference we want to elaborate on here is that between values and variables (where
by variable we mean a variable in the usual programming sense). Following Cleaveland [19], we
define these concepts as follows:

    ■   A value is an “individual constant”: for example, the individual constant that is the integer 3. A
        value has no location in time or space. However, values can be represented in memory by means
        of some encoding, and such representations, or (our preferred term in this context) appearances,
        do have locations in time and space. Indeed, any number of distinct appearances of the same
        value can exist at any number of distinct locations in time and space, meaning, loosely, that any
        number of different variables—see the bullet item immediately following—can have the same
        value, at the same time or different times. Note in particular that, by definition, a value cannot
        be updated; for if it could, then after such an update it would not be that value any longer (in
        general).

    ■   A variable is a holder for an appearance of a value. A variable does have a location in time and
        space.1 Also, of course, variables, unlike values, can be updated; that is, the current value of the
        variable in question can be replaced by another value, probably different from the previous one.
        (Of course, the variable in question is still the same variable after the update

      Please note very carefully that it is not just simple things like the integer 3 that are
legitimate values. On the contrary, values can be arbitrarily complex; for example, a value might be a
geometric point, or a polygon, or an X ray, or an XML document, or a fingerprint, or an array, or a
stack, or a list, or a relation (and on and on). Analogous remarks apply to variables too, of course.
      By the way, the distinction between values and variables might seem obvious; however, it is not
always observed in the literature (in fact, it is easy to fall into traps in this area). By way of illustration,
consider the following extract from a tutorial on object databases [137] (the italicized text in brackets is
commentary by the present authors):

        We distinguish the declared type of a variable from ... the type of the object that is the current
        value of the variable [so an object is a value] ... We distinguish objects from values [so an object



1
  We are speaking intuitively here, not formally. The notion that variables “have location” is useful for explaining what
variables are in an informal sense, but that notion is not part of our formal definition of a variable. That definition is
explained later, in Chapter 14 in particular.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           12
Part I / Preliminaries                                            Chapter 1 / Background and Overview


      is not a value after all] ... A mutator [is an operator such that it is] possible to observe its effect
      on some object [so in fact an object is a variable].

Value vs. Appearance

The third and last logical difference we want to discuss here is the one, touched on in the preceding
subsection, between a value per se and an appearance of that value in some particular context (in
particular, an appearance as the current value of some variable). As already explained, the very same
value can appear in many different contexts simultaneously. Each of those appearances consists,
internally, of some encoding or physical representation of the value in question. For example, the
integer value 12 occurs exactly once in the set of integers—there is exactly one integer 12 “in the
universe,” as it were—but any number of variables might simultaneously contain an appearance of that
integer as their current value, as in this Tutorial D example:
      VAR X INTEGER ;       VAR Y INTEGER ;
      X := 12 ;     /* assign the value 12 to the variable X */
      Y := 12 ;     /* assign the value 12 to the variable Y */

       What is more, some of those appearances might be physically represented by means of (say) a
decimal encoding, and others by means of a binary encoding, of that particular integer (in the example,
X might contain the “packed decimal” encoding 00010010 while Y contains the “pure binary” encoding
00001100). Thus, there is also a logical difference between an appearance of a value, on the one hand,
and the internal encoding or physical representation of that appearance, on the other; in fact, there
might even be a logical difference between the encodings used for different appearances of the same
value.
       The foregoing remarks notwithstanding, we usually find it convenient, for fairly obvious reasons,
to abbreviate encoding of an appearance of a value to just appearance of a value, or (more often) to
just value, so long as there is no risk of ambiguity in doing so. Note carefully too that appearance of a
value is a model concept, whereas encoding of an appearance is an implementation concept. For
example, users certainly might need to know whether variables X and Y contain appearances of the
same value (i.e., whether those variables “compare equal”); however, they do not need to know whether
those appearances use the same physical encoding.


CONCLUDING REMARKS

As already explained, the Manifesto consists of a series of prescriptions, proscriptions, and very strong
suggestions. For purposes of reference, and also to give some idea of the scope of the Manifesto, we
show on the next page a mnemonic list of those prescriptions, proscriptions, and suggestions. We
remind you that “OO” in that list stands for Other Orthogonal. Note: An analogous list for our
inheritance model appears in Chapter 12. No significance should be attached to the sequence in which
items appear in either list.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                             13
                                                     7. No tuple-level operations
RM Prescriptions
                                                     8. No composite attributes
 1. Scalar types                                     9. No domain check override
 2. Scalar values are typed                         10. Not SQL
 3. Read-only vs. update operators
 4. Physical vs. possible representations           OO Prescriptions
 5. Expose possible representations
                                                     1. Compile-time type checking
 6. Type generator TUPLE
                                                     2. Type inheritance (conditional)
 7. Type generator RELATION
                                                     3. Computational completeness
 8. Equality                                         4. Explicit transaction boundaries
 9. Tuples
                                                     5. Nested transactions
10. Relations                                        6. Aggregate operators and empty sets
11. Scalar variables
12. Tuple variables                                 OO Proscriptions
13. Relation variables (relvars)
14. Kinds of relvars                                 1. Relvars are not domains
15. Candidate keys                                   2. No object IDs
16. Databases
17. Transactions                                    RM Very Strong Suggestions
18. Relational algebra
19. Relvar names, relation selectors, and recursion 1. System keys
20. User-defined tuple and relational operators      2. Foreign keys
21. Assignments                                      3. Candidate key inference
22. Comparisons                                      4. Transition constraints
23. Integrity constraints                            5. Quota queries
24. Total database constraints                       6. Generalized transitive closure
25. Catalog                                          7. User-defined generic operators
26. Language design                                  8. SQL migration

RM Proscriptions                                    OO Very Strong Suggestions

 1. No attribute ordering                            1. Type inheritance
 2. No tuple ordering                                2. Types and operators unbundled
 3. No duplicate tuples                              3. Single-level store
 4. No nulls
 5. No nullological mistakes
 6. No internal-level constructs

      We close this chapter by confessing that we do feel a little uncomfortable with the idea of
calling what is, after all, primarily a technical document a “manifesto.” According to Chambers
Twentieth Century Dictionary, a manifesto is “a written declaration of the intentions, opinions, or
motives” of some person or group (e.g., a political party). By contrast, The Third Manifesto is—we
hope—a matter of science and logic, not mere “intentions, opinions, or motives.” Given the
historical precedents that led us to write it, however, our title was effectively chosen for us.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      14
Part I / Preliminaries                                          Chapter 1 / Background and Overview


EXERCISES

1.1    Define and distinguish between the terms database and DBMS as carefully as you can.
       What do you regard as the foundations of database technology?

1.2    What do you understand by the term orthogonality?

1.3    Explain the following in your own words: architecture; implementation; conceptual
       integrity; logical difference; data independence; model.

1.4    What is The Third Manifesto? What problem was it originally intended to solve?

1.5    In the body of this chapter, we said the concepts of type, value, variable, and operator can
       be regarded as providing “a foundation for the foundation.” Explain this remark as carefully
       as you can.

1.6    What do you understand by the term “object/relational database”?

1.7    Explain the logical differences between a value, an appearance of a value, and an encoding
       of an appearance of a value.

1.8    What is D?

1.9    In the body of this chapter, we said the table in Fig. 1.1 was not a relation but, rather, a
       picture of a relation (in general, in fact, there is always a logical difference between a thing
       and a picture of that thing). What are some of the specific points of difference between the
       table in Fig. 1.1 and the relation it depicts?

1.10   Distinguish between imperative, procedural, and functional programming languages. Give
       examples of each. Can you identify any other language styles?

1.11   Who was E. F. Codd?

1.12   If you are familiar with SQL, identify some of the major differences between it and the
       relational model. Note: A precise definition of the relational model appears in the next
       chapter.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 15