                                                       Chapter 2

                      A Survey of the Relational Model

Most of this book assumes you have a reasonably good understanding of the relational model. This
chapter is meant to serve as a quick refresher course on that model; in effect, it summarizes much of
what you will be expected to know in later chapters. A detailed tutorial on this material, and much
more, can be found in reference [76]; if you are familiar with that reference, you probably do not
need to read this chapter in detail. But if your knowledge of the relational model derives from other
sources—especially ones based on SQL—then you probably do need to read this chapter fairly
carefully, because it emphasizes numerous important topics that other sources typically do not.
Such topics include:

        Relations vs. types

        Relation values vs. relation variables

        Predicates and propositions

        Relation-valued attributes

        The crucial role of integrity constraints

        Relational assignment and comparisons

and many others.


THE RUNNING EXAMPLE

Examples in this book are based for the most part on the familiar suppliers-and-parts database (see
Fig. 2.1 for a set of sample values). The semantics are as follows:

       Relvar S represents suppliers (more accurately, suppliers under contract).1 Each supplier has
        one supplier number (S#), unique to that supplier; one name (SNAME), not necessarily
        unique (though the SNAME values in Fig. 2.1 do happen to be unique); one rating or status
        value (STATUS); and one location (CITY).




1
  The term relvar is short for relation variable. It is explained in detail in the section “Relation Variables” later in this
chapter. Also, note that throughout this book we favor the terms relation, attribute, and tuple──usually pronounced to
rhyme with couple──over their less formal and less precise counterparts table, column, and row (except in SQL
contexts).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          page 16
Part I / Preliminaries                                   Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


     Relvar P represents parts (more accurately, kinds of parts). Each kind of part has one part
      number (P#), which is unique; one name (PNAME); one color (COLOR); one weight
      (WEIGHT); and one location where parts of that kind are stored (CITY).

     Relvar SP represents shipments (it shows which parts are supplied by which suppliers). Each
      shipment has one supplier number (S#), one part number (P#), and one quantity (QTY); there
      is at most one shipment at any given time for a given supplier and a given part. Notice that
      the database of Fig. 2.1 includes one supplier, S5, with no shipments at all.
      ╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
      ║     S                                          SP               ║
      ║    ┌────┬───────┬────────┬────────┐           ┌────┬────┬─────┐ ║
      ║    │ S# │ SNAME │ STATUS │ CITY   │           │ S# │ P# │ QTY │ ║
      ║    ├════┼───────┼────────┼────────┤           ├════┼════┼─────┤ ║
      ║    │ S1 │ Smith │     20 │ London │           │ S1 │ P1 │ 300 │ ║
      ║    │ S2 │ Jones │     10 │ Paris │            │ S1 │ P2 │ 200 │ ║
      ║    │ S3 │ Blake │     30 │ Paris │            │ S1 │ P3 │ 400 │ ║
      ║    │ S4 │ Clark │     20 │ London │           │ S1 │ P4 │ 200 │ ║
      ║    │ S5 │ Adams │     30 │ Athens │           │ S1 │ P5 │ 100 │ ║
      ║    └────┴───────┴────────┴────────┘           │ S1 │ P6 │ 100 │ ║
      ║     P                                         │ S2 │ P1 │ 300 │ ║
      ║    ┌────┬───────┬───────┬────────┬────────┐   │ S2 │ P2 │ 400 │ ║
      ║    │ P# │ PNAME │ COLOR │ WEIGHT │ CITY   │   │ S3 │ P2 │ 200 │ ║
      ║    ├════┼───────┼───────┼────────┼────────┤   │ S4 │ P2 │ 200 │ ║
      ║    │ P1 │ Nut   │ Red   │   12.0 │ London │   │ S4 │ P4 │ 300 │ ║
      ║    │ P2 │ Bolt │ Green │    17.0 │ Paris │    │ S4 │ P5 │ 400 │ ║
      ║    │ P3 │ Screw │ Blue │    17.0 │ Oslo   │   └────┴────┴─────┘ ║
      ║    │ P4 │ Screw │ Red   │   14.0 │ London │                     ║
      ║    │ P5 │ Cam   │ Blue │    12.0 │ Paris │                      ║
      ║    │ P6 │ Cog   │ Red   │   19.0 │ London │                     ║
      ║    └────┴───────┴───────┴────────┴────────┘                     ║
      ╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
      Fig. 2.1: The suppliers-and-parts database—sample values

      Here are Tutorial D definitions for these three relvars:
      VAR S REAL RELATION
        { S# S#, SNAME NAME, STATUS INTEGER, CITY CHAR }
        KEY { S# } ;

      VAR P REAL RELATION
        { P# P#, PNAME NAME, COLOR COLOR, WEIGHT WEIGHT, CITY CHAR }
        KEY { P# } ;

      VAR SP REAL RELATION
        { S# S#, P# P#, QTY QTY }
        KEY { S#, P# } ;

      Detailed discussion of the foregoing definitions can be found in Chapter 6, under RM
Prescription 13. For present purposes, it is sufficient to observe that:

     Each relvar has a set of attributes; for example, relvar S has four attributes, called S#,
      SNAME, STATUS, and CITY.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         17
Part I / Preliminaries                                               Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


        Each attribute has a type; for example, the types of the attributes of relvar S are called S#,
         NAME, INTEGER, and CHAR, respectively.

      In this chapter we will mostly take types for granted—we will discuss them in detail in the
next chapter—but it is at least worth stating explicitly that attributes can be of any type whatsoever.1
In particular, those types can be either system defined (built in) or user defined. In our running
example, we will assume, where it makes any difference, that types INTEGER (integers) and
CHAR (character strings of arbitrary length) are system defined and all others are user defined.


TUPLES

Since relations are built out of tuples, it is convenient to begin by defining the term tuple precisely.
Given a collection of types Ti (i = 1, 2, ..., n, where n  0), not necessarily all distinct, a tuple value
(tuple for short) over those types2—t, say—is a set of n ordered triples of the form <Ai,Ti,vi>, where
Ai is an attribute name, Ti is a type name, and vi is a value of type Ti. Moreover:

        The value n is the degree (or arity) of t.

        The ordered triple <Ai,Ti,vi> is a component of t.

        The ordered pair <Ai,Ti> is an attribute of t, and it is uniquely identified by the attribute
         name Ai (attribute names Ai and Aj are the same only if i = j). The value vi is the attribute
         value for attribute Ai of t. The type Ti is the corresponding attribute type. Note: There is,
         of course, a logical difference between an attribute and its name; among other things, an
         attribute is a pair but its name is a singleton. This fact notwithstanding, we often (as we just
         did) use expressions such as “attribute Ai,” informally, to mean the attribute whose name is
         Ai. Similar remarks apply to various other constructs, including types, variables, and
         operators.

        The complete set of attributes is the heading of t.

        The tuple type of t is determined by the heading of t, and the heading and that tuple type both
         have the same attributes (and hence the same attribute names and types) and the same degree
         as t does. The tuple type name is, precisely, TUPLE H, where H is the heading. Thus, the
         particular tuple type name under discussion can be expressed in Tutorial D as follows:
             TUPLE { A1 T1, A2 T2, ..., An Tn }

         The order in which the attributes are specified is immaterial, however; thus, for example,


1
  This remark is true in general, but there are exceptions, of which one of the most important is this: Attributes of
relations in the database──as opposed to relations that are local to the application (see RM Prescription 14)──are not
allowed to be of type pointer. See Chapter 9 for further explanation.
2
    We might also reasonably say the tuple is “over” its attributes, q.v.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                              18
Part I / Preliminaries                                  Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


         TUPLE { A1 T1, A2 T2 }          and     TUPLE { A2 T2, A1 T1 }

      both denote the same tuple type, in Tutorial D.
Here is a sample tuple:
      ┌────┬────┬───────┬──────┬────────┬─────────┬──────┬──────┐
      │ S#   S# │ SNAME   NAME │ STATUS   INTEGER │ CITY   CHAR │
      ├────┴────┼───────┴──────┼────────┴─────────┼──────┴──────┤
      │ S1      │ Smith        │               20 │ London      │
      └─────────┴──────────────┴──────────────────┴─────────────┘

The attribute names here are S#, SNAME, STATUS, and CITY; the corresponding type names are,
respectively, S#, NAME, INTEGER, and CHAR; and the corresponding values are, respectively,
S#('S1'), NAME('Smith'), 20, and 'London'—though most of these expressions have been simplified
somewhat in the picture (and we will make use of similar simplifications in such pictures
throughout this book). The degree of this tuple is four. Its heading is:
      ┌────┬────┬───────┬──────┬────────┬─────────┬──────┬──────┐
      │ S#   S# │ SNAME   NAME │ STATUS   INTEGER │ CITY   CHAR │
      └────┴────┴───────┴──────┴────────┴─────────┴──────┴──────┘

Its type in Tutorial D terms is:
      TUPLE { S# S#, SNAME NAME, STATUS INTEGER, CITY CHAR }

       Now, it is common in informal contexts to omit the type names from a heading, showing just
the attribute names. Informally, therefore, we might represent the foregoing tuple thus:
      ┌────┬───────┬────────┬────────┐
      │ S# │ SNAME │ STATUS │ CITY   │
      ├────┼───────┼────────┼────────┤
      │ S1 │ Smith │     20 │ London │
      └────┴───────┴────────┴────────┘

In Tutorial D, the following expression could be used to denote this tuple:
      TUPLE { S# S#('S1'), SNAME NAME('Smith'), STATUS 20, CITY 'London' }

This expression is an example of a tuple selector invocation. We will have more to say about such
expressions in Chapter 3; here we just remark that—as you might have noticed—the keyword
TUPLE does double duty in Tutorial D, being used in connection with both tuple selector
invocations and tuple type names. An analogous remark applies to the keyword RELATION (see
the next section, “Relations”).

Properties of Tuples

Tuples possess a number of important properties, all of them immediate consequences of the
foregoing definitions. To be specific:

     Every tuple contains exactly one value (of the appropriate type) for each of its attributes.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          19
Part I / Preliminaries                                   Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


     Note carefully that, by definition, a tuple considered in its entirety is also a value. For
      emphasis, we sometimes speak of “tuple values” explicitly, but we usually abbreviate that
      term to just tuples (exactly as we usually abbreviate, e.g., “integer values” to just integers).

     There is no left-to-right ordering to the components of a tuple. This property follows because
      a tuple has a set of components, and sets in mathematics have no ordering to their elements.
      (Our reason for including the redundant qualifier “left-to-right” in the foregoing sentence is
      explained in the next section.)

      Every subset of a tuple is a tuple and every subset of a heading is a heading. Given some
       particular tuple, therefore—say the tuple
       ┌────┬───────┬────────┬────────┐
       │ S# │ SNAME │ STATUS │ CITY   │
       ├────┼───────┼────────┼────────┤
       │ S1 │ Smith │     20 │ London │
       └────┴───────┴────────┴────────┘
      —then what we might call “the {S#,CITY} value in this tuple” is itself a tuple:
       ┌────┬────────┐
       │ S# │ CITY   │
       ├────┼────────┤
       │ S1 │ London │
       └────┴────────┘

In like fashion, every subset of a heading is a heading.
       As an aside, we note that this bullet item is the first place in the text to use the term subset.
We therefore take the opportunity to say that, throughout this book, we take statements of the form
“b is a subset of a” (equivalently, “a is a superset of b”), noncontroversially, to include the
possibility that a and b might be equal; if we wish to exclude that possibility, we will talk explicitly
in terms of proper subsets and supersets. Also, we take statements of the form “a is a set” (again
noncontroversially) to include the possibility that a might be empty; if we wish to exclude that
possibility, we will talk explicitly in terms of nonempty sets.

Tuple Equality

Two tuples are equal, obviously enough, if and only if they are in fact the very same tuple (just as,
e.g., two integers are equal if and only if they are the very same integer). However, it is worth
spelling out the semantics of tuple equality in detail, since so much in the relational model depends
on it; for example, candidate keys, functional dependencies, and most of the operators of the
relational algebra are all defined in terms of it. Here then is a precise definition:

 ■    Tuples t1 and t2 are equal if and only if they have the same attributes A1, A2, ..., An and, for
      all i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), the value of Ai in t1 is equal to the value of Ai in t2.

      Furthermore (this might seem obvious but it needs to be said), if p1 and p2 are appearances of
tuples t1 and t2, respectively, then p1 and p2 are duplicates of each other if and only if t1 and t2 are
equal—i.e., if and only if t1 and t2 are the very same tuple. (See the section “Some Crucial Logical




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              20
Part I / Preliminaries                                   Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


Differences” in Chapter 1 if you need to refresh your memory regarding the meaning of the term
appearance.)


RELATIONS

Now we can define the term relation. A relation value (relation for short), r say, consists of a
heading and a body, where:

     The heading of r is a heading as defined in the previous section. Relation r has the same
      attributes (and hence the same attribute names and types) and the same degree as that heading
      does.

     The body of r is a set of tuples, all having that same heading (and the cardinality of that set is
      the cardinality of r).

The relation type of r is determined by the heading of r, and it has the same attributes (and hence
the same attribute names and types) and degree as that heading does. The relation type name is,
precisely, RELATION H, where H is the heading. In Tutorial D, therefore, we can express a
relation type name as here:
      RELATION { A1 T1, A2 T2, ..., An Tn }

(The order in which the attributes are specified is immaterial, however.) Here is a sample relation:
      ┌────┬────┬───────┬──────┬────────┬─────────┬──────┬──────┐
      │ S#   S# │ SNAME   NAME │ STATUS   INTEGER │ CITY   CHAR │
      ├────┴────┼───────┴──────┼────────┴─────────┼──────┴──────┤
      │ S1      │ Smith        │               20 │ London      │
      │ S2      │ Jones        │               10 │ Paris       │
      │ S3      │ Blake        │               30 │ Paris       │
      │ S4      │ Clark        │               20 │ London      │
      │ S5      │ Adams        │               30 │ Athens      │
      └─────────┬──────────────┴──────────────────┴─────────────┘

Its type in Tutorial D is:
      RELATION { S# S#, SNAME NAME, STATUS INTEGER, CITY CHAR }

       As previously noted, it is common in informal contexts to omit the type names from a
heading, showing just the attribute names. Informally, therefore, we might represent the foregoing
relation thus (as we did in Fig. 2.1, in fact):
      ┌────┬───────┬────────┬────────┐
      │ S# │ SNAME │ STATUS │ CITY   │
      ├════┼───────┼────────┼────────┤
      │ S1 │ Smith │     20 │ London │
      │ S2 │ Jones │     10 │ Paris │
      │ S3 │ Blake │     30 │ Paris │
      │ S4 │ Clark │     20 │ London │
      │ S5 │ Adams │     30 │ Athens │
      └────┴───────┴────────┴────────┘




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            21
Part I / Preliminaries                                          Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


The following expression could be used in Tutorial D to denote this relation:
        RELATION {
            TUPLE { S# S#('S1'), SNAME NAME('Smith'),
                    STATUS 20, CITY 'London' } ,
            TUPLE { S# S#('S2'), SNAME NAME('Jones'),
                    STATUS 10, CITY 'Paris' } ,
            TUPLE { S# S#('S3'), SNAME NAME('Blake'),
                    STATUS 30, CITY 'Paris' } ,
            TUPLE { S# S#('S4'), SNAME NAME('Clark'),
                    STATUS 20, CITY 'London' } ,
            TUPLE { S# S#('S5'), SNAME NAME('Adams'),
                    STATUS 30, CITY 'Athens' } }

(This is an example of a relation selector invocation. See Chapter 3.)

Properties of Relations

       Note that, strictly speaking, a relation does not contain tuples—it contains a body, and that
        body in turn contains tuples. Informally, however, it is convenient to talk as if relations
        contained tuples directly, and we will follow this simplifying convention throughout this
        book.

       Every subset of a body is a body (loosely, every subset of a relation is a relation).

       No relation ever contains two or more distinct appearances of the same tuple ( “duplicate
        tuples”). This property follows because a body is a set of tuples, and sets in mathematics have
        no duplicate elements. Now, you probably know that SQL tables are allowed to contain
        duplicate rows, and SQL tables are thus not relations, in general. Please understand,
        therefore, that in this book we always use the term “relation” to mean a relation—without
        duplicate tuples, by definition—and not an SQL table. Please note further that relational
        operations always produce a result without duplicate tuples, again by definition.

       Relations have no top-to-bottom ordering to their tuples and no left-to-right ordering to their
        attributes, pictures like Fig. 2.1 notwithstanding. (Actually, attributes have no ordering of any
        kind, and it would be logically correct to drop that “left-to-right” qualifier. But to say merely
        that attributes have no ordering could be misconstrued to mean that attribute values cannot be
        ordered—top to bottom, as it were—and we therefore include the qualifier for emphasis.
        Purely for consistency, therefore, we include the qualifier “top-to-bottom” in connection with
        tuple ordering as well.)

       Every tuple of every relation contains exactly one value for each attribute of that relation; i.e.,
        relations are always normalized or, equivalently, in what has historically been called first
        normal form, 1NF.1 Note: In connection with this point, it needs to be said that much of the
        literature talks about—and SQL products support—the use of what are called nulls in attribute


1
  Our understanding of the term first normal form has changed somewhat over the years. See reference [74] for an
exhaustive discussion of this issue.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        22
Part I / Preliminaries                                   Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


      positions to indicate that some value is missing for some reason. However, since (by
      definition) nulls are not values, the notion of a “tuple” containing nulls is a contradiction in
      terms. A “tuple” that contains nulls is not a tuple, and a “relation” that contains such a
      “tuple” is not a relation. Thus, relations never contain nulls.

     Like a tuple, a relation considered in its entirety is a value. Fig. 2.1, for example, shows three
      such values. For emphasis, we sometimes speak of “relation values” explicitly, but we
      usually abbreviate that term to just relations (exactly as we usually abbreviate “tuple values”
      to just tuples). See the next section ( “Relation Variables”) for further discussion of this issue.

Relation-Valued Attributes

As noted near the end of the section “The Running Example” earlier in this chapter, attributes of
relations can be of any type whatsoever (with certain exceptions that we can safely ignore here). It
follows that such attributes can be of relation types in particular, since relation types are certainly
types; in other words, attributes can be relation valued, meaning we can have relations with
attributes whose values are relations in turn. An example of such a relation is shown in Fig. 2.2 (we
will return to this example in our discussion of the GROUP and UNGROUP operators in the section
“Relational Operators,” later in this chapter).
╔════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║   ┌────┬──────────────┐                                        ║
║   │ S# │ PQ           │           │    │ ┌────┬─────┐ │        ║
║   ├════┼──────────────┤           │ S3 │ │ P# │ QTY │ │        ║
║   │    │ ┌────┬─────┐ │           │    │ ├════┼─────┤ │        ║
║   │ S1 │ │ P# │ QTY │ │           │    │ │ P2 │ 200 │ │        ║
║   │    │ ├════┼─────┤ │           │    │ └────┴─────┘ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P1 │ 300 │ │           │    │ ┌────┬─────┐ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P2 │ 200 │ │           │ S4 │ │ P# │ QTY │ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P3 │ 400 │ │           │    │ ├════┼─────┤ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P4 │ 200 │ │           │    │ │ P2 │ 200 │ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P5 │ 100 │ │           │    │ │ P4 │ 300 │ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P6 │ 100 │ │           │    │ │ P5 │ 400 │ │        ║
║   │    │ └────┴─────┘ │           │    │ └────┴─────┘ │        ║
║   │    │ ┌────┬─────┐ │           │    │ ┌────┬─────┐ │        ║
║   │ S2 │ │ P# │ QTY │ │           │ S5 │ │ P# │ QTY │ │        ║
║   │    │ ├════┼─────┤ │           │    │ ├════┼─────┤ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P1 │ 300 │ │           │    │ └────┴─────┘ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P2 │ 400 │ │           └────┴──────────────┘        ║
║   │    │ └────┴─────┘ │                                        ║
╚════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝

RELATION VARIABLES

Consider Fig. 2.1 once again. As noted in the previous section (at the end of the subsection
“Properties of Relations”), that figure shows three relation values: namely, those that happen to
appear in the database at some particular time. But, of course, if we were to look at the database at
some different time, we would probably see three different relation values appearing in their place.
In other words, S, P, and SP in that database are really variables: relation variables, to be precise,
meaning variables whose permitted values are relation values (and the logical difference discussed
in Chapter 1 between values and variables in general thus applies to relation values and relation




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              23
Part I / Preliminaries                                        Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


variables in particular). For example, suppose relation variable S currently has the value—the
relation value—shown in Fig. 2.1, and suppose we delete the tuples (actually there is just one such)
for suppliers in Athens:
      DELETE S WHERE CITY = 'Athens' ;

(Tutorial D syntax again). The result is shown in Fig. 2.3.
╔════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                ┌────┬───────┬────────┬────────┐                ║
║             S │ S# │ SNAME │ STATUS │ CITY    │                ║
║                ├════┼───────┼────────┼────────┤                ║
║                │ S1 │ Smith │     20 │ London │                ║
║                │ S2 │ Jones │     10 │ Paris │                 ║
║                │ S3 │ Blake │     30 │ Paris │                 ║
║                │ S4 │ Clark │     20 │ London │                ║
║                └────┴───────┴────────┴────────┘                ║
╚════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 2.3: Relation variable S (as shown in Fig. 1) after deleting suppliers in Athens
      Conceptually, what has happened here is that the old relation value of S has been replaced en
bloc by a new one. Of course, the old value (with five tuples) and the new one (with four) are
somewhat similar to each other, but they certainly are different values. In fact, the DELETE just
shown is logically equivalent to, and indeed shorthand for, the following relational assignment:
      S := S WHERE NOT ( CITY = 'Athens' ) ;

       As in all assignments, what is happening here is that (a) the source expression on the right
side is evaluated, and then (b) the result of that evaluation is assigned to the target variable on the
left side. As already stated, the net effect is thus to replace the “old” value of S by a “new” one, or
in other words to update the variable S. Note that the left side of the assignment must identify a
variable specifically; variables are updatable by definition, while values (also by definition) are not.
In the final analysis, in fact, to say that V is a variable is to say, precisely, that V can serve as the
target for an assignment operation, no more and no less.
       In analogous fashion, of course, relational INSERT and UPDATE operators are also
shorthand for certain relational assignments. Thus, while Tutorial D certainly does support the
familiar INSERT, DELETE, and UPDATE operators on relation variables, as we will see in
Chapters 5 and 6, it expressly recognizes that those operators are really just shorthands, albeit
convenient ones, for certain relational assignments. (We follow convention throughout this book in
using the generic term “update” to refer to the INSERT, DELETE, and UPDATE—and
assignment—operators considered collectively; indeed, we have already been doing this, as you
might have noticed. When we want to refer to the UPDATE operator specifically, we will set it in
all uppercase as just shown.)
       Back to relation variables. As you probably know, most of the literature in fact uses the term
relation when what it really means is a relation variable (as well as when it means a relation per
se—i.e., a relation value). Historically, however, this practice has certainly caused confusion. In
this book, therefore, we distinguish very carefully between relation variables and relations per se.
We also follow reference [35] in using the term relvar as a convenient shorthand for relation




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            24
Part I / Preliminaries                                  Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


variable (as you already know). More to the point, we take care always to phrase our remarks in
terms of relvars, not relations, when it really is relvars we mean, and in terms of relations, not
relvars, when it really is relations we mean.
      By way of example, here repeated from the section “The Running Example” is a Tutorial D
definition for the suppliers relvar S:
      VAR S REAL RELATION
        { S# S#, SNAME NAME, STATUS INTEGER, CITY CHAR }
        KEY { S# } ;

The KEY specification here defines a candidate key for the relvar (see the subsection “Keys” later
in this section). The REAL specification indicates that this is a real relvar as opposed to a virtual
one—real and virtual relvars being the Manifesto counterparts to what SQL would call “base tables”
and “views,” respectively (see the section “Virtual Relvars” later in this chapter).
       Any given relvar is of some relation type, and all possible values of that relvar are of that
same type. For relvar S, that type is explicitly specified in the relvar definition as:
      RELATION { S# S#, SNAME NAME, STATUS INTEGER, CITY CHAR }

      The terms heading, body, attribute, tuple, cardinality, and degree, defined in the previous
section for relation values, can all be interpreted in the obvious way to apply to relvars as well. (In
the case of body, tuple, and cardinality, they must be understood as applying to the specific relation
that happens to be the current value of the relvar in question.)

Some Remarks on Updating

We return for a moment to the issue of updating relvars, because there is another point to be made
in connection with that issue, viz.: Relational assignment, regardless of what syntax we use to
express it, is really a set-level operator. UPDATE, for example, updates a set of tuples in the target
relvar (loosely speaking!—see further discussion below). Informally, we often talk of, e.g.,
updating some individual tuple, but it must be clearly understood that:

     Such talk really means that the set of tuples we are updating just happens to have cardinality
      one.

     Sometimes, moreover, updating a set of tuples of cardinality one is impossible.

      Suppose, for example, that the suppliers relvar S is subject to the constraint (see the section
“Integrity Constraints,” later in this chapter) that suppliers S1 and S4 are always located in the same
city. Then any “single-tuple” UPDATE on S that attempts to change the city for just one of those
two suppliers must necessarily fail. Instead, both suppliers must be updated simultaneously,
perhaps as here:
      UPDATE S WHERE S# = S#('S1') OR S# = S#('S4')
               ( CITY := some value ) ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            25
Part I / Preliminaries                                   Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


       We now observe that to talk as we have just been doing of “updating a tuple” (or set of tuples,
rather) is really somewhat imprecise—not to say sloppy—as well. If something is subject to update,
then that something must be a variable, not a value; and tuples, like relations, are values and cannot
be updated, by definition. Furthermore, we certainly do not mean, when we talk of “updating a
tuple within some relvar,” that we are updating a tuple variable (for if we did mean that, then we
would be talking about variables containing other variables, a concept to which we do not subscribe
at all). Rather, what we really mean when we talk of, e.g., updating tuple t1 to t2 within some
relvar is that we are replacing one tuple by another. And even that talk is still just shorthand; what
we really mean is that we are replacing the original value of the relvar, r1 say, by another value r2,
and r2 is equal to (r1 MINUS s1) UNION s2, where s1 and s2 are relations containing just t1 and
t2, respectively.
       Analogous remarks apply to phrases such as “updating attribute A” within some tuple. In this
book, we will continue to talk from time to time in terms of updating tuples or attributes thereof—
the practice is convenient—but it must be clearly understood that such talk is only shorthand, and
rather sloppy shorthand at that.

Keys

Let K be a subset of the heading of relvar R. Then K is a candidate key (or just key for short) for R
if and only if it possesses both of the following properties:

      Uniqueness: No possible value for R contains two distinct tuples with the same value for K.

      Irreducibility (also known as nonredundancy or minimality): No proper subset of K has the
       uniqueness property.

      Observe that the key concept applies to relvars specifically (an analogous notion can be
defined for relation values as well, but relvars are the important case). For the suppliers-and-parts
database, the sole keys are {S#} for relvar S, {P#} for relvar P, and {S#,P#} for relvar SP. Note the
braces, by the way: Keys are sets of attributes, not attributes per se, even when the set in question
involves just a single attribute as it does for relvars S and P. Note too that, by definition, key values
are tuples!—and so we see that, as claimed earlier, the definition of “key” relies on the notion of
tuple equality. For such reasons, we always enclose the pertinent attribute name(s) in braces, as in
the examples at hand.
      Any given relvar always has at least one key (why?). If it has two or more, the relational
model has historically required—at least in the case of real relvars—that one be chosen as the
primary key, and the others are then alternate keys. While this discipline (i.e., choosing a primary
key) might be useful in practice, we do not insist on it, because we regard the idea of making one
key somehow “more equal than others” as a psychological issue merely [52]. Of course, we do not
prohibit it either, and indeed we tend to adopt it in our own examples. In particular, we assume—
where it makes any difference—that {S#}, {P#}, and {S#,P#} are the primary keys for relvars S, P,
and SP, respectively (as the double underlining in Fig. 2.1 suggests).
      We also define the notion of a superkey. A superkey is a superset of a key; equivalently, a
subset of the heading of relvar R is a superkey for R if it possesses the uniqueness property but not
necessarily the irreducibility property. In the case of the suppliers relvar S, for example, every set




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            26
Part I / Preliminaries                                           Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


of attributes that includes S#—the full heading in particular—is a superkey. Note that if the system
is told that K is a key for relvar R, it can enforce the uniqueness property for K but not the
irreducibility property; in other words, it can guarantee at best only that K is a superkey. (If we
wished, however, we could at least impose a syntax rule to the effect that no two keys defined for
the same relvar be such that one is a superset of the other.)
       Another important concept, related to that of keys, is that of functional dependency. Let A
and B be subsets of the heading of relvar R. Then the functional dependency A  B holds for R if
and only if, in every possible value for R, whenever two tuples have the same value for A, they also
have the same value for B.1 For example, suppose there were an integrity constraint on relvar S to
the effect that if two suppliers are located in the same city, then they must also have the same status.
Then the functional dependency
       { CITY }  { STATUS }

would hold for that relvar S.
      We will have little to say regarding functional dependencies in this book, but it is interesting
to note in passing that they provide the basis for an alternative definition of the notion of a
superkey. To be specific, let X be a subset of the heading of relvar R; then X is a superkey for R if
and only if the functional dependency X  Y holds for every subset Y of the heading of R.

Foreign Keys

Let R1 and R2 be relvars, not necessarily distinct. Let K and FK be subsets of the headings of R1
and R2, respectively, such that (a) K is a key for R1 and (b) there exists a (very often empty)
sequence of attribute renamings—see the section “Relational Operators” later in this chapter—that
maps K into K' (say), such that K' and FK consist of exactly the same attributes. Then FK is a
foreign key if and only if, for all time, every tuple in the current value of R2 has a value for FK that
is equal to the value of K' obtained from some necessarily unique tuple in the current value of R1.
In the case of suppliers and parts, for example, {S#} and {P#} in relvar SP are foreign keys, and
they match—or reference—the sole candidate key (in fact, the primary key) in relvars S and P,
respectively.
      It follows immediately from the foregoing that no database is ever allowed to contain any
unmatched foreign key values—where an “unmatched foreign key value” is a foreign key value in
the current value of some referencing relvar R2 for which there does not exist a tuple with the
applicable candidate key value in the current value of the applicable referenced relvar R1. This rule
is known as the referential integrity rule. (In case it is not obvious, by “referencing relvar” we
mean the relvar that includes the foreign key, and by “referenced relvar” we mean the relvar that
includes the applicable candidate key. In the case of suppliers and parts, for example, SP is a
referencing relvar and S and P are both referenced relvars.)
      Note: We include this brief subsection because foreign keys are of considerable pragmatic
importance, and also because they were part of the relational model as originally defined (see
references [20-21], also reference [70]). However, we must emphasize that foreign keys are not

1
  Those A and B values are themselves tuples, so we see that the notion of functional dependency also relies on the
notion of tuple equality.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           27
Part I / Preliminaries                                              Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


truly fundamental—they merely provide a convenient shorthand for certain integrity constraints that
are commonly required in practice.1 For this reason, The Third Manifesto merely suggests, and
does not prescribe, foreign key support (see Chapter 10).

Relvars vs. Types

We close this section by pointing out that there is an obvious logical difference between relvars and
types: Relvars have types but are not types. Indeed, a relvar is a variable, and variables are not
types. We mention this point explicitly because many people attempt to argue to this day (albeit not
usually in these terms) that relvars are types: a mistake that we examine in detail, along with a
related one, in Chapter 9.


RELVARS, RELATIONS, AND PREDICATES

Everything we have said about relvars and relations in this chapter so far is accurate, of course, but
there is another way to think about these matters—not the way (we hasten to add) in which the
database community usually does think about them, but we venture to suggest it should be. To be
more specific, it is common to think of a relvar as if it were just a simple abstraction of a traditional
computer file; but we think the ideas discussed in this section can lead to a deeper understanding of
what relational databases are really all about.
       Consider the suppliers-and-parts database once again. That database contains three relvars,
and of course each of those relvars is supposed to represent some portion of reality in some way. In
fact, we can make this statement more precise: Each of those relvars represents some predicate,
and each of those predicates is, in essence, a generic statement about some portion of reality. Here
is an example:

         Supplier S# is under contract, is named SNAME, has status STATUS, and is located in city
         CITY.

This predicate is the intended interpretation—also known as the intension (note the spelling)—
for the suppliers relvar S.
        So what exactly is a predicate?2 In general, it is a function; like all functions, it takes a set of
parameters and it returns a result when it is invoked. But a predicate in particular is a truth-valued
function, meaning the result it returns when invoked is a truth value (TRUE or FALSE). In the case
of the predicate just shown for relvar S, for example, the parameters are the attributes of the relvar
heading—S#, SNAME, STATUS, and CITY—and they stand for values of the corresponding types
(i.e., S#, NAME, INTEGER, and CHAR, respectively). When we invoke the function (or
instantiate the predicate, as the logicians say), we substitute arguments for the parameters. Suppose
we substitute the argument values S1, Smith, 20, and London, respectively. Then we obtain the
following proposition:

1
    Similar remarks apply to candidate keys, but here the practical benefits of providing a shorthand are overwhelming.
2
  Actually there is a slight lack of consensus on this question in the literature; not all logicians would agree with every
detail in our definition of the term. However, we believe they would agree with the essence of that definition.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                               28
Part I / Preliminaries                                              Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


         Supplier S1 is under contract, is named Smith, has status 20, and is located in city London.

       Now, a proposition in logic is, in general, a statement that is unconditionally either true or
false; however, the particular propositions we are interested in here are supposed to be ones that
evaluate to TRUE, a point we will return to in just a moment. In the example just shown, the
proposition is indeed true—at least, so we believe—because a tuple corresponding to that
proposition does currently appear in relvar S (see Fig. 2.1).
       More generally, let relvar R represent predicate P; then P is the relvar predicate for relvar
  1
R. Moreover, let the current value of R be r; then each tuple t in r can be regarded as representing
a certain proposition p, derived by invoking, or instantiating, P with the attribute values from t
being substituted for the parameters of P. And (very important!) we assume by convention that
each such proposition—each proposition, that is, that is represented by some tuple in r—evaluates
to TRUE. Thus, given the sample value for relvar S shown in Fig. 2.1, we assume the following
propositions all evaluate to TRUE:

         Supplier S1 is under contract, is named Smith, has status 20, and is located in city London.

         Supplier S2 is under contract, is named Jones, has status 10, and is located in city Paris.

         Supplier S3 is under contract, is named Blake, has status 30, and is located in city Paris.

And so on. Furthermore, we subscribe, noncontroversially, to the Closed World Assumption
[121], which says that if a given tuple plausibly could appear in the relvar at some time but in fact
does not, then the corresponding proposition is understood by convention to be one that evaluates to
FALSE at the time in question. For example, the tuple
         TUPLE { S# S#('S6'), SNAME NAME('Lopez'), STATUS 30, CITY 'Madrid' }

is (let us agree) a plausible supplier tuple; however, it does not appear in the current value of relvar
S as shown in Fig. 2.1, and so we are entitled to assume that the corresponding proposition—

         Supplier S6 is under contract, is named Lopez, has status 30, and is located in city Madrid.

—evaluates to FALSE at this time. In other words, the relvar contains, at any given time, all and
only the tuples that represent true propositions at that time.
      More terminology: Again, let P be the relvar predicate or intension for relvar R, and let the
value of R at some given time be r. Then r—or the body of r, to be more precise—constitutes the
extension of P at that given time. (Observe, therefore, that the extension varies over time but the
intension does not.) Another way of saying the same thing is to say that relation r is “the current
manifestation” of predicate P. Yet another way is to say that r contains exactly the tuples that make
P evaluate to TRUE (at the time in question).




1
    In references [82, 83] and elsewhere we called relvar predicates external predicates.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                  29
Part I / Preliminaries                                            Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


      Now, if we think of each relvar as containing the tuples that make its predicate evaluate to
TRUE at the time in question, it follows that we can think in a similar way about arbitrary
relational expressions. For example, consider the following expression:
       S { S#, SNAME, STATUS }

This expression denotes a projection—see the section “Relational Operators” later in this chapter—
of the current value of relvar S on attributes S#, SNAME, and STATUS. The result of that
projection contains all tuples of the form
       TUPLE { S# s, SNAME n, STATUS t }

such that a tuple of the form
       TUPLE { S# s, SNAME n, STATUS t, CITY c }

currently appears in relvar S for some CITY value c. Thus, that result represents the current
extension of a predicate that looks like this:

       There exists some city CITY such that supplier S# is under contract, is named SNAME, has
       status STATUS, and is located in city CITY.

       Observe that the result relation has three attributes and the corresponding predicate has three
parameters; CITY is not a parameter to that predicate but a bound variable instead, thanks to the
fact that it is quantified by the phrase there exists some city.1 Another, perhaps clearer, way of
making the same point—i.e., that the predicate has three parameters, not four—is to observe that the
predicate as just stated is logically equivalent to this one:

       Supplier S# is under contract, is named SNAME, has status STATUS, and is located in some
       city.

This version of the predicate very clearly has just three parameters.
      It follows from the foregoing that virtual relvars in particular represent certain predicates (see
the section “Virtual Relvars” later in this chapter). For example, let virtual relvar SST be defined as
follows:
       VAR SST VIRTUAL ( S { S#, SNAME, STATUS } ) ;

Then the relvar predicate for relvar SST is precisely:

       Supplier S# is under contract, is named SNAME, has status STATUS, and is located in some
       city.



1
  Bound variables are not variables in the usual programming sense, they are variables in the sense of predicate logic.
See reference [78] or reference [112] if you need further explanation of quantifiers, bound variables, and related
matters.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                               30
Part I / Preliminaries                                   Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


       There are a few more points to be made regarding predicates and propositions. First, we have
said that a predicate has a set of parameters. Of course, that set can be empty—and if it is, then the
predicate in question degenerates to a proposition (certainly it is unconditionally either true or
false). In other words, all propositions are predicates, but most predicates are not propositions.
       Second, we have said that a predicate is “a generic statement about some portion of reality.”
We can now see that it is precisely the fact that the statement is, in general, parameterized that
makes it generic (and if the set of parameters is empty, then that “generic” statement becomes rather
specific!).
       Third, we have also said, in the case of a relvar predicate specifically, that the parameters
correspond to the attributes of the relvar; thus, a relvar of degree n represents a predicate with n
parameters, or what the logicians call an n-place predicate. However, no harm is done, logically
speaking, if we think of that set of n parameters as constituting a single tuple parameter (and
corresponding arguments, in some instantiation of the predicate, as constituting a single tuple
value). Thus, we can simplify our discussions somewhat by considering relvar predicates always to
be monadic, meaning they are defined in terms of just one (tuple) parameter. And we can then go
on to think of a given tuple t (of the appropriate tuple type) as either satisfying or violating a given
relvar predicate P. To be specific, tuple t satisfies predicate P if and only if the proposition
obtained from P by substituting t for its (tuple) parameter evaluates to TRUE, and it violates it if
and only if it does not satisfy it.
       Fourth, a matter of notation: For clarity, we have deliberately used different symbols, R and
P, for a relvar and its predicate. Sometimes, however, there are good reasons to conflate the two.
Thus, we will occasionally write expressions of the form R(t)—meaning, specifically, that tuple t
appears in relvar R and therefore satisfies the relvar predicate corresponding to R.

Relations vs. Types

It follows from everything we have said in this section so far that:

      Types comprise the things we can talk about.

      Relations comprise the truths we utter about those things.

      In other words, types give us things we can talk about—in effect, they give us our
vocabulary—and relations give us the ability to say things about the things we can talk about.
(There is a nice analogy here that might help you remember and appreciate these important points:
Types are to relations as nouns are to sentences.) In the case of suppliers, for example, the things
we can talk about are supplier numbers, names, integers, and character strings, and the things we
can say are things of the form “The supplier with the specified supplier number is under contract,
has the specified name, has the status denoted by the specified integer, and is located in the city
denoted by the specified character string.” Note the following important corollaries! In order (as
we put it earlier) to “represent some portion of reality”:

 1.   Types and relations are both necessary—without types, we have nothing to talk about;
      without relations, we cannot say anything.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            31
Part I / Preliminaries                                     Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


    2.   Types and relations are sufficient, as well as necessary—we do not need anything else,
         logically speaking. (Well, we need relvars too, in order to reflect the fact that reality changes
         over time, but not to reflect any particular portion of reality.)

    3.   Types and relations are not the same thing.

       With regard to the last of these points, incidentally, we saw in the previous section that there
is a logical difference between relvars and types—a relvar is a variable, and variables are not types.
By the same token, we now see that there is a logical difference between relations and types as
well—a relation is a value, and values are not types either.


INTEGRITY CONSTRAINTS

An integrity constraint (usually abbreviated to just constraint) can be thought of as a boolean
expression—also known as a logical, conditional, or truth-valued expression—that is required to
evaluate to TRUE.1 Constraints are so called because they constrain the values that can appear in
some context. They fall into two broad categories, which we call type constraints and database
constraints, respectively:

        A type constraint defines the set of values that constitute a given type.

        A database constraint limits the set of values a given database is permitted to assume. Note:
         Local or private (nondatabase) data is subject to constraints too, but such matters are beyond
         the scope of this book.

Type Constraints

In Tutorial D, type constraints are specified as part of the definition of the type to which they
apply. For example:
         TYPE S# POSSREP { C CHAR CONSTRAINT SUBSTR ( C, 1, 1 ) = 'S'
                                    AND CHAR_LENGTH ( C )  2
                                    AND CHAR_LENGTH ( C )  5 } ;

This definition constrains supplier numbers to be such that they can “possibly be represented” by a
character string C of from two to five characters, of which the first must be an “S”; we have
assumed the existence of an operator called CHAR_LENGTH, which returns the length in
characters of its character string argument. (In practice we might additionally want to specify that
every character in C after the first is a decimal digit; we do not do so in the example for reasons of
simplicity only.) Note: Possible representations and related matters are explained in detail in
Chapter 3. Several further examples of type constraints can be found under RM Prescription 1 in
Chapter 6.



1
    Formally, in fact, a constraint is a proposition.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              32
Part I / Preliminaries                                               Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


      Type constraints are checked during the execution of some selector operator for the type in
question (see Chapter 3). For example, the expression S#('S1') is an invocation of a selector (also
called S#) for type S#, and it returns the supplier number for supplier S1. As another example, the
expression S#('X2') is also such an invocation; it fails on a type constraint violation, however,
because the first character of the character string argument is not an “S”. See RM Prescription 23 in
Chapter 6 for further discussion.

Database Constraints

Database constraints are specified in Tutorial D by means of an explicit CONSTRAINT statement
(or by some shorthand that is effectively equivalent to some such CONSTRAINT statement). Here
are some examples (note the constraint names DBC1-DBC5 and the appeals to the self-explanatory
operators IS_EMPTY and COUNT):
         CONSTRAINT DBC1 IS_EMPTY ( S WHERE STATUS < 1
                                      OR    STATUS > 100 ) ;

Meaning: Supplier status values must be in the range 1-100 inclusive. This constraint involves just
a single attribute of a single relvar;1 note that it can be checked for a given supplier by examining
just the pertinent supplier tuple in isolation. If relvar S already contains a supplier tuple that
violates this constraint when the foregoing CONSTRAINT statement is executed, that execution
will fail, of course. More generally, whenever the user attempts to define a new database constraint,
the system will first check to see that the constraint in question is satisfied by the database at that
time; if not, the constraint is rejected, otherwise it is accepted and enforced from that point forward.
       CONSTRAINT DBC2 IS_EMPTY ( S WHERE CITY = 'London'
                                    AND   STATUS ≠ 20 ) ;

Meaning: Suppliers in London must have status 20. This constraint involves two distinct attributes
(of the same relvar), but it is still the case that it can be checked for a given supplier by examining
just the pertinent supplier tuple in isolation.
       CONSTRAINT DBC3 COUNT ( S ) = COUNT ( S { S# } ) ;

Meaning: {S#} is a superkey for relvar S. Like constraints DBC1 and DBC2, this constraint still
involves just one relvar; however, it clearly cannot be checked for a given supplier by examining
just the pertinent supplier tuple in isolation. Note: The Tutorial D syntax KEY {S#} might be
regarded as shorthand for the foregoing more longwinded expression (ignoring the fact that keys are
supposed to be irreducible as well as unique, and ignoring also the fact that the KEY syntax does
not include a constraint name); in other words, if K is a key for R, then that fact is a database
constraint. In like manner, if the functional dependency A  B holds for R, then that fact also is a
database constraint.



1
  It is not, however, what references [82, 83] call an attribute constraint, which is simply a constraint to the effect that a
specified attribute is of a specified type.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                                 33
Part I / Preliminaries                                        Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


      CONSTRAINT DBC4 IS_EMPTY ( ( S JOIN SP ) WHERE STATUS < 20
                                               AND   P# = P#('P6') ) ;

      Meaning: No supplier with status less than 20 can supply part P6. Observe that this
constraint involves—in fact, interrelates—two distinct relvars, S and SP. In general, of course, a
database constraint might involve any number of distinct relvars.
      CONSTRAINT DBC5 SP { S# }  S { S# } ;

       Meaning: Every supplier number in the shipments relvar must also exist in the suppliers
relvar. Notice that this constraint involves a relational comparison; to be specific, it requires that
the body of the relation that is the projection on S# of the current value of relvar SP be a subset of
the body of the relation that is the projection on S# of the current value of relvar S. Given that {S#}
is a key—in fact, the key—for relvar S, of course, we can see that this constraint is basically just the
foreign key constraint from shipments to suppliers; thus, foreign key constraints also are database
constraints.
       Database constraints are required to be satisfied—i.e., to evaluate to TRUE, given the values
currently appearing in the database—at statement boundaries; in other words, such constraints are
conceptually checked at the end of any statement that might cause them to be violated ( “immediate
checking”). If any such check fails, the effects on the database of the statement in question are
undone and an exception is raised.
       As an aside, we remark that since statements are delimited by semicolons in Tutorial D, we
might say, very informally, that database constraint checking is “done at semicolons.” Note: The
term statement here basically means relational assignment; fundamentally, relational assignment is
the only operator that can update the database. (We ignore here relvar definitions and other
statements of a definitional nature, such as the CONSTRAINT statement itself, that cause updates
to be made to the database catalog. In fact, of course, all such statements are really just relational
assignments anyway; to be specific, they are relational assignments in which the target relvars
happen to be relvars in the catalog.) Observe, therefore, that statements that update nothing in the
database at all—including the statements BEGIN TRANSACTION, COMMIT, and ROLLBACK
in particular—do not involve any database constraint checking. See Chapter 6 for further
discussion.
       Now let C1, C2, ..., Cn be all of the database constraints defined for some given database DB
(but ignore the constraint names, for simplicity). Then the conjunction
      ( C1 ) AND ( C2 ) AND ... AND ( Cn ) AND TRUE

can be regarded as the total constraint for database DB. Note that final “AND TRUE,” by the way;
the implication is that if no constraints are explicitly specified for a given database, then the default
is just TRUE. The reason this observation is valid is that no Ci and Cj can contradict one another.1
Why not? Because if Ci is declared first, then Cj will necessarily evaluate to FALSE when the
CONSTRAINT statement that declares it is executed, and that execution will therefore certainly
fail.

1
  A contradiction in logic is an expression such as C AND NOT C that always evaluates to FALSE. (By contrast, a
tautology is an expression such as C OR NOT C that always evaluates to TRUE.)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       34
Part I / Preliminaries                                            Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


       Let DB be a database, then, and let DBC be the total constraint for DB. Since we have said
that all database constraint checking is immediate—i.e., “done at semicolons”—database DB is
never allowed to violate that constraint DBC: a state of affairs that we refer to as The Golden Rule.
Another way of saying the same thing is that no update on database DB can be accepted if it leads to
a violation of the constraint DBC; thus, the constraint DBC constitutes the criterion for
acceptability of updates on database DB.
       One consequence of the foregoing is that no update on relvar R in database DB can be
accepted if it leads to a violation of any portion of constraint DBC that involves that relvar R: a
weaker form of The Golden Rule. More terminology: Any portion of DBC that involves relvar R
is a relvar constraint for R, and the conjunction RC of all such portions is the total constraint for R
(see Appendix E for further discussion).1 Hence, we can say that no update on relvar R can be
accepted if it leads to a violation of constraint RC.


RELATIONAL OPERATORS

The relational model includes an open-ended set of generic operators known collectively as the
relational algebra (the operators are generic because they apply to all possible relations, loosely
speaking). Each operator takes at least one relation as input and produces another as output. In this
section, we define a number of such operators; we also give a few examples, but only where we
think the operators in question might be unfamiliar to you. Note: The fact that the output is always
a relation is referred to as the relational closure property. It is that property that, among other
things, allows us to write nested relational expressions.

Rename

Let a be a relation with an attribute X and no attribute Y. Then the expression
       a RENAME ( X AS Y )

yields a relation that differs from a only in that the name of the specified attribute is Y instead of X.
      Tutorial D also supports a “multiple” form of RENAME—for example:
       a RENAME ( X1 AS Y1 , X2 AS Y2 )

is shorthand for
       ( a RENAME ( X1 AS Y1 ) ) RENAME ( X2 AS Y2 )

In other words, the individual renamings X1 AS Y1 and X2 AS Y2 are executed in sequence as
written [changed to parallel execution in Tutorial D Version 2].
      Tutorial D also supports “multiple” forms of EXTEND, SUMMARIZE, WRAP/UNWRAP,
and GROUP/UNGROUP (see later), to all of which analogous remarks apply.

1
  In references [82, 83] and elsewhere we called total relvar constraints internal predicates──partly because the total
relvar constraint for R can be characterized as an attempt to formalize what we called in those same references the
external (i.e., relvar) predicate for R.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                               35
Part I / Preliminaries                                               Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


Restrict

Let a be a relation and let p be a predicate1 that is quantifier free (see the next paragraph) and takes
just one parameter, a tuple with heading equal to that of a. Then the restriction of a according to
p—
        a WHERE p

—is a relation with heading equal to that of a and with body consisting of all tuples t of a that
satisfy p. For example, the expression
        S WHERE STATUS > 10

evaluates to a relation with heading equal to that of relvar S and body consisting of all tuples from
the current value of S that satisfy the predicate STATUS > 10. (Note that “STATUS > 10” can
indeed be regarded as a predicate with sole parameter a tuple with the same heading as S.)
       We now explain the term quantifier free. A given monadic predicate is quantifier-free if we
can determine whether a given tuple satisfies it by examining just that tuple in isolation. Such a
predicate is also said to be a restriction predicate or a restriction condition (sometimes a simple
restriction condition, for emphasis).
       Now, Tutorial D provides no explicit support for quantifiers at all. However, it does support
them implicitly (in effect), and for user convenience it allows the predicate p in the expression
        a WHERE p

not to be quantifier free (again, in effect). In other words, Tutorial D supports “WHERE
predicates” of arbitrary complexity, loosely speaking.

Project

Let relation a have attributes X, Y, ..., Z (and possibly others). Then the projection of a on X, Y, ...,
Z—
        a { X, Y, ..., Z }

—is a relation with:

       A heading derived from the heading of a by removing all attributes not mentioned in the set {
        X, Y, ..., Z }



1
  Predicate p here is not a relvar predicate in the sense of that term discussed earlier in this chapter; in particular, unlike
those earlier predicates, it must be computable, meaning the system must be able to evaluate it (given an appropriate
argument, of course). To elaborate: If tuple t appears in relvar R, the system can certainly “compute” the fact that t
satisfies the relvar predicate P for R; P is computable in that sense. But if the user attempts to insert t into R, the system
has no way to “compute” whether or not t satisfies P; all it can do is check to see whether inserting t into R will cause
any integrity constraint to be violated.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                                  36
Part I / Preliminaries                                    Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


      A body consisting of all tuples { X x, Y y, ..., Z z } such that a tuple appears in a with X value
       x, Y value y, ..., and Z value z

     Tutorial D also allows the foregoing projection to be expressed as a { ALL BUT U, V, ... W },
where U, V, ..., W are all of the attributes of a apart from X, Y, ..., Z. An analogous remark applies to
SUMMARIZE (BY form only), GROUP, and WRAP (see later).

Join

Let relations a and b have attributes
       X1, X2, ..., Xm, Y1, Y2, ..., Yn

and
       Y1, Y2, ..., Yn, Z1, Z2, ..., Zp

respectively; i.e., the Y attributes Y1, Y2, ..., Yn (only) are common to the input relations a and b, the
X attributes X1, X2, ..., Xm are the other attributes of a, and the Z attributes Z1, Z2, ..., Zp are the
other attributes of b. Observe that:

      We can assume without loss of generality, thanks to the availability of RENAME, that no
       attribute Xi (i = 1, 2, ..., m) has the same name as any attribute Zj (j = 1, 2, ..., p).

      Every attribute Yk (k = 1, 2, ..., n) has the same type in both a and b (for otherwise it would
       not be a common attribute, by definition).

For brevity, let the X attributes all taken together be denoted just X, and similarly for Y and Z. Then
the join of a and b—
       a JOIN b

—is a relation with heading the (set-theoretic) union of the headings of a and b and body consisting
of the set of all tuples t such that t is the (set-theoretic) union of a tuple appearing in a and a tuple
appearing in b. In other words, the heading is { X, Y, Z }, and the body consists of all tuples { X x, Y
y, Z z } such that a tuple appears in a with X value x and Y value y and a tuple appears in b with Y
value y and Z value z.
       Some logical consequences of the foregoing definition:

      If n = 0, join degenerates to (relational) cartesian product. Note: This operation differs from
       conventional cartesian product in that it gives a result that is a relation (of degree m+p).
       Conventional cartesian product, by contrast, gives a result that is a set of ordered pairs (of
       tuples, one each from a and b). As a consequence, relational cartesian product, unlike its
       conventional counterpart, is both commutative and associative. From this point forward, we
       will take the term cartesian product (sometimes just product, unqualified) to refer to the
       relational operator specifically, barring explicit statements to the contrary.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              37
Part I / Preliminaries                                   Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


     If m = p = 0, a JOIN b degenerates to a INTERSECT b—see later in this section. (Cartesian
      product and intersection are thus both special cases of join. This fact notwithstanding, for
      psychological reasons Tutorial D supports INTERSECT explicitly, though not cartesian
      product.)

     If p = 0, a JOIN b degenerates to a SEMIJOIN b, which is equivalent to (a JOIN b){X,Y} (in
      other words, it is the join of a and b, projected back on the attributes of a). Likewise, if m =
      0, a JOIN b degenerates to b SEMIJOIN a.

Join is both commutative and associative. Tutorial D therefore supports an n-adic form of the
operator, and it allows unnecessary parentheses to be omitted from an uninterrupted sequence of
dyadic joins. For example, the expressions
      a JOIN ( b JOIN c )

and
      ( a JOIN b ) JOIN c

can both be unambiguously abbreviated to just
      a JOIN b JOIN c

They can also be written as JOIN {a,b,c} (and the order in which the operands are specified here is
immaterial).
       Furthermore, it turns out to be desirable to define both (1) joins of just a single relation and
(2) joins of no relations at all. Let s be a set of relations. Then:

 1.   If s contains just one relation r, then the join of all relations in s—in Tutorial D, JOIN {r}—
      is simply r.

 2.   If s contains no relations at all, then the join of all relations in s—in Tutorial D, JOIN {}—is
      TABLE_DEE. Note: TABLE_DEE is the unique relation having degree zero and cardinality
      one. See Chapter 6 for further explanation.

Union, Intersect, and Difference

Let a and b be relations of the same type. Then:

     The union of those relations, a UNION b, is a relation of the same type, with body consisting
      of all tuples t such that t appears in a or b or both. Note: Tutorial D also supports “disjoint
      union” (D_UNION), which is a version of union that requires its operands to be disjoint (i.e.,
      to have no tuples in common). As we will see in Chapter 6, D_UNION can be useful in
      defining the semantics of INSERT, also in certain constraints.

     The intersection of those relations, a INTERSECT b, is a relation of the same type, with
      body consisting of all tuples t such that t appears in both a and b.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              38
Part I / Preliminaries                                             Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


        The difference between those relations, a MINUS b (in that order), is a relation of the same
         type, with body consisting of all tuples t such that t appears in a and not b. Note: Tutorial D
         also supports SEMIMINUS (semidifference); the expression a SEMIMINUS b is equivalent
         to a MINUS (a SEMIJOIN b). Observe in particular that if a and b are of the same type, then
         a SEMIMINUS b degenerates to a MINUS b. (This fact notwithstanding, Tutorial D
         supports MINUS explicitly—though this support, like that for INTERSECT, is included
         mainly for psychological reasons.)

      Like join, union and intersection are each both commutative and associative. Tutorial D
therefore supports an n-adic form of both, and it allows unnecessary parentheses to be omitted from
an uninterrupted sequence of dyadic unions or intersections. For example, the expressions
         a UNION ( b UNION c )

and
         ( a UNION b ) UNION c

can both be unambiguously abbreviated to just
         a UNION b UNION c

They can also be written as UNION {a,b,c} (and the order in which the operands are specified here
is immaterial).
      Furthermore, it turns out to be desirable to define both (1) unions and intersections of just a
single relation and (2) unions and intersections of no relations at all. Let s be a set of relations all of
the same type RT. Then:

    1.   If s contains just one relation r, then the union and intersection of all relations in s—in
         Tutorial D, UNION {r} and INTERSECT {r}—are both simply r.

    2.   If s contains no relations at all, then:

         ●   The union of all relations in s—in Tutorial D, UNION h {}, where h is the heading of
             RT—is the empty relation of type RT. Note the need to specify the result heading h in
             this case, since there are no input relations from which that heading can be inferred.

         ●   The intersection of all relations in s—in Tutorial D, INTERSECT h {}, where h is the
             heading of RT—is the “universal” relation of type RT (i.e., that unique relation of type RT
             that contains all possible tuples of type TUPLE h).1 We remark in passing that the term
             universal relation is more frequently used in the literature with a rather different meaning
             (see, e.g., reference [101]).


1
  You might see an apparent contradiction here: Given that INTERSECT is a special case of JOIN, you might have
expected both operators to give the same result when applied to no relations at all, but they do not. See Exercise 2.33 at
the end of the chapter.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             39
Part I / Preliminaries                                            Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


Extend

Let a be a relation. Then the extension
        EXTEND a ADD ( exp AS Z )

is a relation with

       A heading consisting of the heading of a extended with the attribute Z

       A body consisting of all tuples t such that t is a tuple of a extended with a value for attribute Z
        that is computed by evaluating exp on1 that tuple of a

Relation a must not have an attribute called Z, and exp must not refer to Z. Observe that the result
has cardinality equal to that of a and degree equal to one plus that of a. The type of Z in that result
is the type of exp.

        Here is a simple example of EXTEND:
        EXTEND S ADD ( 3 * STATUS AS TRIPLE )

The result of this operation, given our usual sample data values, is shown in Fig. 2.4.
      By the way, do not make the mistake in this example of thinking that relvar S has been
changed in the database. EXTEND is not an SQL-style “ALTER TABLE.” Rather, the result of
the EXTEND expression is simply a derived relation, just as (e.g.) the result of the expression S
JOIN SP is a derived relation. Analogous remarks apply to all of the other relational algebra
operators, of course: in particular, to RENAME (see earlier).
╔════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║            ┌────┬───────┬────────┬────────┬────────┐           ║
║            │ S# │ SNAME │ STATUS │ CITY   │ TRIPLE │           ║
║            ├════┼───────┼────────┼────────┼────────┤           ║
║            │ S1 │ Smith │     20 │ London │     60 │           ║
║            │ S2 │ Jones │     10 │ Paris │      30 │           ║
║            │ S3 │ Blake │     30 │ Paris │      90 │           ║
║            │ S4 │ Clark │     20 │ London │     60 │           ║
║            │ S5 │ Adams │     30 │ Athens │     90 │           ║
║            └────┴───────┴────────┴────────┴────────┘           ║
╚════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 2.4: Extending S (as shown in Fig. 2.1) to add a “triple status” attribute

Summarize

Let a and b be relations. Then the summarization
        SUMMARIZE a PER ( b ) ADD ( summary AS Z )

1
  To be more precise, evaluating exp “on” some tuple u of a means (a) substituting, for each appearance in exp of an
attribute name A from a, the value of attribute A from that tuple u and then (b) evaluating the modified version of exp
that results.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                               40
Part I / Preliminaries                                            Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


is a relation defined as follows:

        First, b must be of the same type as some projection of a; i.e., every attribute of b must be an
         attribute of a. Let the attributes of that projection (equivalently, of b) be A1, A2, ..., An.

        The heading of the result consists of the heading of b extended with the attribute Z.

        The body of that result consists of all tuples t such that t is a tuple of b extended with a value
         for attribute Z. That Z value is computed by evaluating summary over1 all tuples of a that
         have the same value for attributes A1, A2, ..., An as tuple t does. (Of course, if no tuples of a
         have the same value for A1, A2, ..., An as tuple t does, then summary is evaluated over an
         empty set of tuples.)
Relation b must not have an attribute called Z, and summary must not refer to Z. Observe that the
result has cardinality equal to that of b and degree equal to one plus that of b. The type of Z in that
result is whatever the type of summary is.
         Here is a simple example of SUMMARIZE:
         SUMMARIZE SP PER ( S { S# } ) ADD ( COUNT ( ) AS P_COUNT )
The result of this operation, given our usual sample data values, is shown in Fig. 2.5. Observe in
particular that the result includes a tuple for supplier S5. Note: If you happen to be familiar with
SQL, it might help to point out that, by contrast, the SQL expression
         SELECT S#, COUNT(*) AS P_COUNT
         FROM   SP
         GROUP BY S#

yields a result containing no tuple for supplier S5, because relvar SP as shown in Fig. 2.1 contains
no such tuple either. In other words, it might be thought that the expression just shown is an SQL
analog of the SUMMARIZE expression earlier, but in fact it is not—not quite.
╔════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                        ┌────┬─────────┐                        ║
║                        │ S# │ P_COUNT │                        ║
║                        ├════┼─────────┤                        ║
║                        │ S1 │       6 │                        ║
║                        │ S2 │       2 │                        ║
║                        │ S3 │       1 │                        ║
║                        │ S4 │       3 │                        ║
║                        │ S5 │       0 │                        ║
║                        └────┴─────────┘                        ║
╚════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 2.5: Summarizing SP (as shown in Fig. 2.1) to obtain “number of shipments per supplier”

         Here is another example:
         SUMMARIZE S PER ( S { CITY } ) ADD ( AVG ( STATUS ) AS AVG_STATUS )



1
    Remarks analogous to those in footnote 1 on the previous page apply here also.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                   41
Part I / Preliminaries                                           Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


In this example, “relation b” is not just “of the same type as” some projection of “relation a,” it
actually is such a projection. In such a case, Tutorial D allows the expression to be abbreviated
slightly, thus:
       SUMMARIZE S BY { CITY } ADD ( AVG ( STATUS ) AS AVG_STATUS )
Either way, the result is as shown in Fig. 2.6.
╔════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                     ┌────────┬────────────┐                    ║
║                     │ CITY   │ AVG_STATUS │                    ║
║                     ├════════┼────────────┤                    ║
║                     │ London │         20 │                    ║
║                     │ Paris │          20 │                    ║
║                     │ Athens │         30 │                    ║
║                     └────────┴────────────┘                    ║
╚════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 2.6: Summarizing S (as shown in Fig. 2.1) to obtain “average status per city”

       Tutorial D also allows the PER or BY specification in SUMMARIZE to be omitted entirely,
in which case the specification PER (TABLE_DEE) is implicit. Again, see Chapter 6 for further
explanation of TABLE_DEE.
       We assume you are familiar with the semantics of the various kinds of “summaries”
(COUNT, SUM, AVG, and so forth) and omit further details here. However, we stress the point
that a “summary” is not the same thing as an aggregate operator invocation (see below). An
aggregate operator invocation is an expression1 and is allowed wherever a literal or, more generally,
a selector invocation of the appropriate type would be allowed. A “summary,” by contrast, is
merely an operand within a SUMMARIZE invocation; it is not an expression, it has no meaning
outside the context of a SUMMARIZE invocation, and in fact it cannot appear outside that context.
       So what then is an aggregate operator invocation? Well, an aggregate operator is, very
loosely, an operator that derives a single value from the “aggregate” of such values appearing in
some specified relation or in some specified attribute of some specified relation. As with the
business of “summaries” earlier, we assume you are familiar with the semantics of such operators
and do not give detailed definitions here. However, we do give a few examples and corresponding
results (based on our usual sample data values). Note the difference between the two AVG
examples in particular: The first—in which the comma and the second argument could be omitted
if desired—returns the average of the three status values in the projection of S over STATUS, the
second returns the average of the five status values in S.
       COUNT ( S )                                                         /* result          5 */

       COUNT ( S { CITY } )                                                /* result          3 */

       AVG ( S { STATUS }, STATUS )                                        /* result         20 */

       AVG ( S, STATUS )                                                   /* result         22 */


1
  Usually though not always a scalar expression specifically (see Chapter 5). For present purposes we take the term
scalar expression to mean, simply, an expression that is neither tuple nor relation valued. The whole matter of
“scalarness” is discussed in detail in Chapter 3; for now we just assume it is well understood.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           42
Part I / Preliminaries                                            Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


       MAX ( S, STATUS )                                                    /* result         30 */

       SUM ( EXTEND S ADD
              ( ( 2 * STATUS ) + 1 AS XYZ ) , XYZ )                         /* result        225 */

       OR ( EXTEND S ADD
             ( STATUS > 20 AS TEST ) , TEST )                               /* result TRUE */

Group and Ungroup

The fact that we can have relations with attributes that are relation valued leads to the need for
operators for mapping between relations that contain such attributes and relations that do not. For
example:
       SP GROUP ( { P#, QTY } AS PQ )

Given our usual sample data, this expression yields the result shown in Fig. 2.7.
╔════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║   ┌────┬──────────────┐                                        ║
║   │ S# │ PQ           │                                        ║
║   ├════┼──────────────┤                                        ║
║   │    │ ┌────┬─────┐ │           │    │ ┌────┬─────┐ │        ║
║   │ S1 │ │ P# │ QTY │ │           │ S3 │ │ P# │ QTY │ │        ║
║   │    │ ├════┼─────┤ │           │    │ ├════┼─────┤ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P1 │ 300 │ │           │    │ │ P2 │ 200 │ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P2 │ 200 │ │           │    │ └────┴─────┘ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P3 │ 400 │ │           │    │ ┌────┬─────┐ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P4 │ 200 │ │           │ S4 │ │ P# │ QTY │ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P5 │ 100 │ │           │    │ ├════┼─────┤ │        ║
║   │    │ │ P6 │ 100 │ │           │    │ │ P2 │ 200 │ │        ║
║   │    │ └────┴─────┘ │           │    │ │ P4 │ 300 │ │        ║
║   │    │ ┌────┬─────┐ │           │    │ │ P5 │ 400 │ │        ║
║   │ S2 │ │ P# │ QTY │ │           │    │ └────┴─────┘ │        ║
║   │    │ ├════┼─────┤ │           └────┴──────────────┘        ║
║   │    │ │ P1 │ 300 │ │                                        ║
║   │    │ │ P2 │ 400 │ │                                        ║
║   │    │ └────┴─────┘ │                                        ║
╚════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 2.7: Grouping SP over P# and QTY

       Observe first that the original expression
       SP GROUP ( { P#, QTY } AS PQ )

—loosely, “group SP over P# and QTY”—might be read as “group SP by S#,” S# being the sole
attribute of SP not mentioned in the GROUP specification.1 The result is a relation defined as


1
  If you happen to be familiar with SQL, it might help to point out that──very loosely speaking──GROUP in Tutorial
D specifies the attributes that are to be grouped together, whereas GROUP BY in SQL specifies the other attributes (i.e.,
the attributes that control the grouping). In other words, the expression SP GROUP ({P#,QTY} AS PQ) might be read
as “group SP by S#,” S# being the sole attribute of SP not mentioned in the GROUP specification. Indeed, the
“grouping” {P#,QTY} in the example can alternatively be specified as {ALL BUT S#}, in Tutorial D.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           43
Part I / Preliminaries                                   Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


follows. First, the heading looks like this:
      { S# S#, PQ RELATION { P# P#, QTY QTY } }

In other words, it consists of a relation-valued attribute PQ (where PQ values in turn have attributes
P# and QTY), together with all of the other attributes of SP (of course, “all of the other attributes of
SP” here just means attribute S#). Second, the body contains exactly one tuple for each distinct S#
value in SP (and no other tuples). Each tuple in that body consists of the applicable S# value (s,
say), together with a PQ value (pq, say) obtained as follows:

 ■    Each SP tuple is replaced by a tuple (x, say) in which the P# and QTY components have been
      “wrapped"—see later—into a tuple-valued component (y, say).

 ■    The y components of all such tuples x in which the S# value is equal to s are then “grouped”
      into a relation, pq, and a result tuple with S# value equal to s and PQ value equal to pq is
      thereby obtained.

The overall result is thus indeed as shown in Fig. 2.7. Note in particular that the result includes no
tuple for supplier S5 (because relvar SP does not currently do so either).
      Observe that the result of r GROUP ( { A1, A2, ..., An } AS B ) has degree equal to nr-n+1,
where nr is the degree of r.
      Now we turn to UNGROUP. Let SPQ be the relation shown in Fig. 2.7. Then the expression
      SPQ UNGROUP ( PQ )

(perhaps unsurprisingly) gives us back our usual SP relation. To be more precise, it yields a relation
defined as follows. First, the heading looks like this:
      { S# S#, P# P#, QTY QTY }

In other words, the heading consists of attributes P# and QTY (derived from attribute PQ), together
with all of the other attributes of SPQ (i.e., just attribute S#, in the example). Second, the body
contains exactly one tuple for each combination of a tuple in SPQ and a tuple in the PQ value within
that SPQ tuple (and no other tuples). Each tuple in that body consists of the applicable S# value (s,
say), together with P# and QTY values (p and q, say) obtained as follows:

     Each SPQ tuple is replaced by an “ungrouped” set of tuples, one such tuple (x, say) for each
      tuple in the PQ value in that SPQ tuple.

     Each such tuple x contains an S# component (s, say) equal to the S# component from the SPQ
      tuple in question and a tuple-valued component (y, say) equal to some tuple from the PQ
      component from the SPQ tuple in question.

     The y components of each such tuple x in which the S# value is equal to s are then
      “unwrapped”—see later—into separate P# and QTY components (p and q, say), and a result
      tuple with S# value equal to s, P# value equal to p, and QTY value equal to q is thereby
      obtained.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            44
Part I / Preliminaries                                           Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


The overall result is thus, as claimed, our usual SP relation.
       Note: It follows from the definition of UNGROUP that if SPQ had included a tuple for
supplier S5, with PQ value an empty relation—if SPQ had the value shown in Fig. 2.2 in
particular—then the result of evaluating SPQ UNGROUP ( PQ ) would still include no tuple for
supplier S5.
       Observe that the result of r UNGROUP ( B )—where the relations that are values of the
relation-valued attribute B have heading { A1, A2, ..., An }—has degree equal to nr+n-1, where nr is
the degree of r.

Additional Operations

Tutorial D supports a few additional operations over and above those described so far. For
purposes of reference, we briefly summarize those additional operations in this subsection.

Compose: Let a and b be as for JOIN. Then a COMPOSE b is equivalent to (a JOIN b){X,Z}.
Note: If a and b have no attributes in common, then COMPOSE degenerates to JOIN (and that
JOIN in turn degenerates to cartesian product).

Semijoin and Semidifference: We have already mentioned the fact that Tutorial D supports these
operators directly. However, it also supports more user-friendly syntax for both, according to which
a SEMIJOIN b and a SEMIMINUS b can be expressed as
       a MATCHING b            and       a NOT MATCHING b

(respectively). For example, the query “Get suppliers who do not supply part P1” can be
formulated thus:
       S NOT MATCHING ( SP WHERE P# = P#('P1') )

Substitute [dropped in Tutorial D Version 2, EXTEND being revised to support the same effect]:1
We do not attempt to define this operator here in full generality (such a definition appears in
Chapter 5), but content ourselves with a simple example. Consider the following expression:
        UPDATE S WHERE CITY = 'Paris' :
                 { STATUS := 2 * STATUS , CITY := 'Nice' }

       The first point to note about this expression is that it is an expression, not a statement (there is
no terminating semicolon), and it has no effect on relvar S. What it does do is yield a relation
containing just those tuples from relvar S for which the city is Paris—except that, in those tuples,
the status is doubled and the city is set to Nice. The overall expression is thus equivalent to the
following:




1
  The name substitute here has nothing to do with the substitution of arguments for parameters, nor with the concept of
substitutability as understood in the context of type inheritance (see Part IV).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           45
Part I / Preliminaries                                  Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


      WITH ( S WHERE CITY = 'Paris' ) AS T1 ,
           ( EXTEND T1 ADD ( 2 * STATUS AS NEW_STATUS, 'Nice' AS NEW_CITY ) )
                                                                     AS T2 ,
           ( T2 { ALL BUT STATUS, CITY } ) AS T3 ,
           ( T3 RENAME ( NEW_STATUS AS STATUS , NEW_CITY AS CITY ) AS T4 :
      T4

Notice the use of WITH here to introduce names for the results of certain subexpressions. We will
be making heavy use of this construct in the chapters to come. See Chapter 5 for a formal
explanation.
       Now, in Chapter 3 we will see that operators in general fall into two disjoint categories, read-
only vs. update operators; and (at the risk of confusing you) we need to stress the fact that the
substitute operator UPDATE is not an update operator!—it is a read-only operator instead. We use
the keyword UPDATE because the operator does closely resemble the familiar UPDATE statement
in its effect. In fact, given support for the “substitute” operator UPDATE as sketched above, the
effect of the UPDATE statement
      UPDATE R WHERE p : { attribute updates } ) ;

can neatly be defined as being equivalent to that of the following assignment:
      R := ( R WHERE NOT ( p ) )
              UNION
            ( UPDATE R WHERE p : { attribute updates } ) ;

Again, see Chapter 5 for a formal explanation. Note: For the remainder of this book, we will rely
on context to make it clear whether the term “UPDATE operator” refers to the read-only or update
operator of that name.

Wrap and Unwrap: Consider the following relation types:
      RELATION { S# S#, P# P#, QTY QTY }

      RELATION { S#, PQ TUPLE { P# P#, QTY QTY } }

Let us refer to these types as SPT3 and SPT2, respectively, and let SP3 and SP2 be relvars of types
SPT3 and SPT2, respectively (where the 3 and 2 refer to the number of attributes in each case).
Then:

      The expression
       SP3 WRAP ( { P#, QTY } AS PQ )

       takes the relation that is the current value of SP3 and, for each tuple in that relation, “wraps”
       the P# and QTY components of that tuple to yield a single tuple-valued PQ component. The
       result of the expression is thus of type SPT2, and so (e.g.) the following assignment is valid:
       SP2 := SP3 WRAP ( { P#, QTY } AS PQ ) ;

      The expression




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           46
Part I / Preliminaries                                     Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


        SP2 UNWRAP ( PQ )

        takes the relation that is the current value of SP2 and, for each tuple in that relation,
        “unwraps” the (tuple-valued) PQ component of that value to yield two scalar components P#
        and QTY. The result of the expression is thus of type SPT3, and so (e.g.) the following
        assignment is valid:
        SP3 := SP2 UNWRAP ( PQ ) ;

Divide: We defer a detailed explanation of this operator to Chapter 6 (see RM Prescription 18).

Tclose: “Tclose” stands for transitive closure. Let a be a binary relation with attributes X and Y,
both of the same type T. Then the transitive closure of a, TCLOSE a, is a relation a+ with heading
the same as that of a and body a superset of that of a, defined as follows: The tuple
      { X x, Y y }

appears in a+ if and only if it appears in a or there exists a sequence of values z1, z2, ..., zn, all of
type T, such that the tuples
      { X x, Y z1 }, { X z1, Y z2 }, ..., { X zn, Y y }

all appear in a. See RM Prescription 19 in Chapter 6 for further explanation, also RM Very Strong
Suggestion 6 in Chapter 10.

Relational Operations on Relvars

As we have seen, the operators of the relational algebra apply, by definition, to relation values
specifically. In particular, of course, they apply to the values that happen to be the current values of
relation variables. As a consequence, it clearly makes sense to talk about—for example—“the
projection on attribute A of relvar R,” meaning the relation that results from taking the projection on
that attribute A of the current value r of that relvar R.
       Sometimes, however, it is convenient to use expressions like “the projection on attribute A of
relvar R” in a slightly different sense. By way of example, suppose we define a virtual relvar, or
view, of the suppliers relvar S, called SC, that consists of just the S# and CITY attributes of that
relvar (see the next section). In Tutorial D, that definition might look like this:
      VAR SC VIRTUAL ( S { S#, CITY } ) ;

In this example, we might say, loosely but very conveniently, that relvar SC is “the projection on S#
and CITY of relvar S”—meaning, more precisely, that the value of SC at all times is the projection
on S# and CITY of the value of relvar S at the time in question. In a sense, therefore, we can talk in
terms of projections of relvars per se, rather than just in terms of projections of current values of
relvars. We hope this kind of dual usage on our part will not cause you any confusion.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                 47
Part I / Preliminaries                                  Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


VIRTUAL RELVARS

A virtual relvar or view V is a relvar whose value at time t is the result of evaluating a certain
relational expression at that time t. The expression in question is specified when V is defined. To
repeat an example from the previous section:
      VAR SC VIRTUAL ( S { S#, CITY } ) ;

The goal is to make virtual relvars look like real ones to the user (meaning, of course, the user who
uses them, as opposed to the user who actually defines them). If this goal is achieved, several
advantages accrue (see reference [76] for a detailed discussion); but can it be achieved? Well, the
implication is that the user must be allowed to operate on the virtual relvar exactly as if were real,
and such operations must be mapped by the system into certain “equivalent” operations on the real
relvars in terms of which the virtual one is—possibly via many levels of indirection—ultimately
defined.
      Read-only operations are straightforward. For example, the expression
      SC WHERE CITY = 'London'

can be mapped very simply by the system into
      ( S { S#, CITY } ) WHERE CITY = 'London'

But what about update operations? As you are probably aware, the view update problem has been
the subject of investigation for many years. When we wrote this book’s predecessor [83], we
thought that problem was solved, but we realized subsequently that there were still some
unanswered questions. For that reason we choose not to discuss the issue further here; instead, we
refer you to Appendix E for a detailed examination of the topic.
       We close this section by emphasizing that we do not, in this book, reserve the term relvar to
mean a real relvar exclusively (SQL, by contrast, very commonly uses the term table to mean a
“base table” exclusively). If we want to say that some relvar R is a real relvar specifically—or a
virtual relvar specifically, come to that—then we will say as much explicitly.


THE RELATIONAL MODEL

For purposes of future reference, we close this chapter with a rather abstract definition of the
relational model, based on one in reference [70]. Briefly, the relational model consists of the
following five components:

 1.   An open-ended collection of scalar types, including in particular type BOOLEAN (truth
      values)

 2.   A relation type generator and an intended interpretation for relations of types generated
      thereby

 3.   Facilities for defining relation variables of such generated relation types




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            48
Part I / Preliminaries                                  Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


 4.   A relational assignment operator for assigning relation values to such relation variables

 5.   An relationally complete but otherwise open-ended collection of generic relational operators
      for deriving relation values from other relation values

      We offer the following additional comments on these five components:

 1.   The scalar types can be system or user defined, in general; thus, a means must be available for
      users to define their own scalar types (this requirement is implied, partly, by the fact that the
      set of such types is open ended). A means must therefore also be available for users to define
      their own scalar operators, since types without operators are useless. The only required
      system-defined scalar type is BOOLEAN (the most fundamental type of all), but a real system
      will surely support other built-in scalar types (e.g., INTEGER) as well.

 2.   The relation type generator allows users to specify individual relation types as desired (see
      Chapters 3-6 for further explanation). The intended interpretation for a given relation of a
      given relation type is as a set of true propositions, all of them instantiations of some common
      predicate.

 3.   Facilities for defining relation variables must be available (of course). Relation variables are
      the only variables allowed in a relational database. Note: This latter observation is in
      accordance with Codd’s Information Principle. Codd stated that principle in various forms
      and in various places over the years (indeed, he was known to refer to it as the fundamental
      principle underlying the relational model). One possible formulation is as follows:

      The entire information content of the database is represented in one and only one way:
      namely, as explicit values in attribute positions in tuples in relations.

       (Reference [76] remarks that this principle might better be called The Principle of Uniform
      Representation. The Principle of Uniformity of Representation might be better still; certainly
      it is more accurate, though somewhat clumsy.)

 4.   Variables are updatable by definition; hence, every kind of variable is subject to assignment,
      and relation variables are no exception. INSERT, DELETE, and UPDATE shorthands are
      permitted and indeed useful, but strictly speaking they are only shorthands.

 5.   The generic relational operators are the operators that make up the relational algebra, and they
      are therefore built in (though there is no inherent reason why users should not be able to
      define additional operators of their own, if desired). They are used for the formulation of
      relational expressions. Those expressions in turn serve many purposes; for example, they are
      used in query formulation, in virtual relvar definition, and (very important!) in the
      specification of constraints.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            49
Part I / Preliminaries                                  Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


EXERCISES

2.1    State The Information Principle.

2.2    What is a relational assignment?

2.3    Define the terms attribute, body, cardinality, degree, heading, relation, relvar, and tuple.

2.4    State as precisely as you can what it means for two tuples to be equal.

2.5    Which of the relational operators defined in this chapter have a definition that does not rely
       on tuple equality?

2.6    What is a relation-valued attribute (RVA)? Give an example of a relation with (a) one RVA,
       (b) two RVAs. Also give two more relations that represent the same information as those
       relations but do not involve RVAs. Also give an example of a relation with an RVA such
       that there is no relation that represents precisely the same information but has no RVA.
       Finally, assuming all of your example relations are in fact values of corresponding relvars,
       give relvar predicates for those relvars.

2.7    What is an aggregate operator?

2.8    Define the operators extend, summarize, wrap, unwrap, group, and ungroup.

2.9    Write Tutorial D tuple selector invocations for a typical tuple from (a) the parts relvar, (b)
       the shipments relvar.

2.10   Write a Tutorial D expression that returns TRUE if the current value of the parts relvar P is
       empty and FALSE otherwise. Do not use the IS_EMPTY shorthand.

2.11   Given the usual suppliers-and-parts database, what is the value of the expression S JOIN SP
       JOIN P? What is the corresponding predicate? Warning: There is a trap here.

2.12   Given sample values for the suppliers-and-parts database as shown in Fig. 2.1 in this
       chapter, what values do the following expressions denote? In each case, also give an
       informal interpretation of the expression in natural language.
       a.      S SEMIJOIN ( SP WHERE P# = P#('P2') )

       b.      P NOT MATCHING ( SP WHERE S# = S#('S2') )

       c.      S { CITY } UNION P { CITY }

       d.      S { CITY } MINUS P { CITY }

       e.      S { CITY } D_UNION P { CITY }

       f.      S { S#, CITY } COMPOSE P { P#, CITY }




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                             50
Part I / Preliminaries                                  Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


       g.      JOIN { ( S RENAME ( CITY AS SC ) ) { SC } ,
                      ( P RENAME ( CITY AS PC ) ) { PC } }

       h.      WITH ( S WHERE NOT ( CITY = 'Athens' ) ) AS T1 ,
                    ( T1 RENAME ( CITY AS SC ) ) AS T2 ,
                    ( P WHERE NOT ( CITY = 'London' ) ) AS T3,
                    ( T3 RENAME ( CITY AS PC ) ) AS T4 :
               TCLOSE ( JOIN { T2 { SC } , T4 { PC } } )

2.13   Write Tutorial D expressions for the following queries on the suppliers-and-parts database:

       a.      Get all shipments.

       b.      Get supplier numbers for suppliers who supply part P1.

       c.      Get suppliers with status in the range 15-25 inclusive.

       d.      Get part numbers for parts supplied by a supplier in London.

       e.      Get part numbers for parts not supplied by any supplier in London.

       f.      Get city names for cities in which at least two suppliers are located.

       g.      Get all pairs of part numbers such that some supplier supplies both of the indicated
               parts.

       h.      Get the total number of parts supplied by supplier S1.

       i.      Get supplier numbers for suppliers with a status lower than that of supplier S1.

       j.      Get supplier numbers for suppliers whose city is first in the alphabetic list of such
               cities.

       k.      Get part numbers for parts supplied by all suppliers in London.

       l.      Get supplier-number/part-number pairs such that the indicated supplier does not
               supply the indicated part.

       m.      Get all pairs of supplier numbers, Sx and Sy say, such that Sx and Sy supply exactly
               the same set of parts each.

2.14   Which if any of the following expressions are equivalent?
       a.      SUMMARIZE r PER ( r { } ) ADD ( COUNT ( ) AS CT )

       b.      SUMMARIZE r ADD ( COUNT ( ) AS CT )

       c.      SUMMARIZE r BY { } ADD ( COUNT ( ) AS CT )

       d.      EXTEND TABLE_DEE ADD ( COUNT ( r ) AS CT )




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            51
Part I / Preliminaries                                 Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


2.15   What do you understand by the term first normal form?

2.16   Let R be a relvar of degree n. What is the maximum number of candidate keys R might
       possess?

2.17   What do you understand by the terms proposition and predicate? Give examples.

2.18   Explain the term relvar predicate. Give relvar predicates for the parts and shipments relvars
       from the suppliers-and-parts database.

2.19   Explain the Closed World Assumption.

2.20   In the body of the chapter, we said any type whatsoever can be used as the basis for defining
       attributes, in general. That qualifier “in general” was there for a reason, however. Can you
       think of any exceptions to this general rule?

2.21   Define the terms functional dependency, candidate key, and foreign key.

2.22   Candidate keys are sets of attributes. What happens if the set in question is empty (i.e.,
       contains no attributes)? Can you think of any uses for such an empty (or nullary) candidate
       key?

2.23   (This is essentially a repeat of Exercise 1.9, but you should be able to give a more
       comprehensive answer now.) There are many logical differences between a relation and a
       table. List as many as you can.

2.24   What is the closure property of the relational algebra?

2.25   Using Tutorial D, write integrity constraints for the suppliers-and-parts database to express
       the following requirements:

       a.      All London suppliers must have status 20.

       b.      No two suppliers can be located in the same city.

       c.      At most one supplier can be located in Athens at any one time.

       d.      There must exist at least one London supplier.

       e.      The average supplier status must be at least 10.

       f.      Every London supplier must be capable of supplying part P2.

       What operations can cause these constraints to be violated?

2.26   Let r be a relation of degree n. How many different projections of r are there?




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        52
Part I / Preliminaries                                  Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


2.27   Union, intersection, cartesian product, and join are all both commutative and associative.
       Verify these claims. Also verify that semijoin is associative but not commutative.

2.28   Consider the expression a JOIN b. If a and b have disjoint headings, this expression is
       equivalent to a TIMES b (where TIMES denotes cartesian product); if they have the same
       heading, it is equivalent to a INTERSECT b. Verify these claims. What is the expression
       equivalent to if the heading of a is a proper subset of that of b?

2.29   Show that MINUS can be regarded as a special case of SEMIMINUS.

2.30   In ordinary arithmetic there are two special numbers, 1 and 0, with the properties that
             x * 1       =   1 * x   =   x

       and
             x * 0       =   0 * x   =   0

       for all numbers x. What relations if any play analogous roles in the relational algebra?
       Investigate the effect of the algebraic operations discussed in this chapter on those relations.

2.31   What do the following Tutorial D expressions denote?
       a.      RELATION { S# S#, P# P#, QTY QTY } { }

       b.      RELATION { TUPLE { S# S#('S1'), P# P#('P1'), QTY QTY(300) } }

       c.      RELATION { TUPLE { } }

       d.      RELATION { } { TUPLE { } }

       e.      RELATION { } { }

2.32   Closure is important in the relational model for the same kind of reason that numeric closure
       is important in ordinary arithmetic. In arithmetic, however, there is one situation where the
       closure property breaks down, in a sense—namely, division by zero. Is there any analogous
       situation in the relational algebra?

2.33   Given that intersect is a special case of join, why do not both operators give the same result
       when applied to no relations at all?

2.34   Let r be the relation denoted by the following expression:
             SP GROUP ( { } AS X )

       Show what r looks like, given our usual sample value for SP. Also show the result of
             r UNGROUP ( X )




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           53
Part I / Preliminaries                                 Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


2.35   Let A and B be relvars. State the candidate key(s) for each of the following:
       a.      A WHERE p

       b.      A {...}

       c.      A UNION B

       d.      A INTERSECT B

       e.      A MINUS B

       f.      A JOIN B

       g.      EXTEND A ADD ( exp AS Z )

       h.      SUMMARIZE A PER ( B ) ADD ( exp AS Z )

       Assume in each case that A and B meet the requirements for the operation in question (e.g.,
       they are of the same type, in the case of UNION).

2.36   Show that WRAP and UNWRAP are really just shorthand for certain combinations of other
       operators.

2.37   Consider this expression:
             SUMMARIZE SP PER ( S { S# } ) ADD ( COUNT ( ) AS NP )

       Give an expression involving EXTEND instead of SUMMARIZE that is logically
       equivalent to this expression.

2.38   Define virtual relvars for the following:
       a.      Suppliers in London

       b.      Supplier numbers for suppliers who supply every purple part

       c.      Supplier-number/part-number pairs for suppliers and parts that are not in the same
               city

2.39   Consider the suppliers-and-parts database, but ignore the parts relvar for simplicity. Here in
       outline are two possible designs for suppliers and shipments:
       1.      S { S#, SNAME, STATUS, CITY }
               SP { S#, P#, QTY }

       2.      SSP { S#, SNAME, STATUS, CITY, P#, QTY }
               XSS { S#, SNAME, STATUS, CITY }

       Design 1 is as illustrated in Fig. 2.1. In Design 2, by contrast, relvar SSP contains a tuple
       for every shipment, giving the applicable part number and quantity and full supplier details,




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          54
Part I / Preliminaries                                   Chapter 2 / A Survey of The Relational Model


       and relvar XSS contains supplier details for suppliers who supply no parts at all. Write
       virtual relvar definitions to express Design 2 in terms of Design 1 and vice versa. Also,
       show the applicable integrity constraints for each design. Does either design have any
       obvious advantages over the other? If so, what are they?

2.40   It is sometimes suggested that a relvar is really just a traditional computer file, with tuples
       instead of records and attributes instead of fields. Discuss.

2.41   We have seen that every relvar (and in fact every relation) corresponds to some predicate. Is
       the converse true?




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              55