                                                    Chapter 3

                             Toward a Theory of Types

This chapter resembles the previous one in that a detailed tutorial on the material to be discussed
can be found in reference [76]; if you are familiar with that reference, therefore, you might not need
to study this chapter in depth. Unfortunately, however, the material in question is, arguably,
supported even less widely and less well by current products than the relational model is. As a
result, most readers will probably need to read the chapter fairly carefully.
       Our subject is data types (types for short). As we saw in Chapter 1, types are fundamental; in
particular, every value is of some type, so is every attribute of every tuple and every relation, and so
is every variable. So what is a type? Essentially, it is a named, finite set of values.1 Examples
include:

    ■   Type INTEGER (the set of all integers)

    ■   Type CHAR (the set of all character strings)

    ■   Type S# (the set of all supplier numbers)

And when we say that (e.g.) some relation has an attribute STATUS of type INTEGER, what we
mean is that values of that attribute are integers, and nothing but integers. Points arising:

    ■   First, types are also called domains, especially in relational contexts; and in object contexts
        they are sometimes called object classes, or just classes for short. We remark as an aside that
        SQL also uses the term domain, but not in the relational sense. A domain in SQL might be
        regarded, loosely, as a kind of syntactic template that can be used as a basis for defining
        attributes (or columns, rather).

    ■   Second, a caveat: We are trying to be reasonably precise in this book. Therefore, instead of
        saying that, e.g., type INTEGER is the set of all integers, we ought really to say that it is the
        set of all integers that are capable of representation in the computer system under
        consideration; there will always be some integers that are beyond the representational
        capability of any given computer system (which is why we say in our model that types are
        always finite). Analogous remarks apply to many subsequent statements and examples, as
        you might expect; we will not bother to spell the point out explicitly every time, however,
        letting this one caveat do duty for all.

    ■   Third, we remind you that types are not limited to simple things like integers. Indeed, we saw
        in Chapter 1 that values and variables can be arbitrarily complex—and that is so precisely


1
  Possibly an empty set of values (in which case we have an empty type). This possibility will be touched on from time
to time in the next few chapters but will not become really important until we get to Part IV.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                   page 56
Part I / Preliminaries                                                       Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


        because the types of those values and variables can be arbitrarily complex. Thus, to
        paraphrase a remark from that chapter, a type might consist of geometric points, or polygons,
        or X rays, or XML documents, or fingerprints, or arrays, or stacks, or lists, or relations (and
        on and on). Note the case of XML documents in particular! As mentioned in Chapter 1, a
        battle raged in the 1990s over the claim that object technology would replace relational
        technology. That battle is won, but we now find ourselves with another on our hands—there
        are now those who claim that XML technology will replace relational technology. We reject
        this claim; instead, we regard “XML documents” as just another data type that can be handled
        perfectly well in a proper relational framework. Indeed, you might have noticed in the BIRD
        example (Fig. 1.1) in Chapter 1 that we showed attribute DESCR as being of just such a type.

    ■   Fourth, we have said a type is a set of values (more precisely, a named set of values), but it
        would be more correct to say it is the set of all values that satisfy a certain type constraint.
        In Tutorial D, such constraints can be defined as suggested by the following example
        (repeated from Chapter 2):
        TYPE S# POSSREP { C CHAR CONSTRAINT SUBSTR ( C, 1, 1 ) = 'S'
                                            AND CHAR_LENGTH ( C )  2
                                            AND CHAR_LENGTH ( C )  5 } ;

        This statement constrains type S# (supplier numbers) to consist of all values that can possibly
        be represented by a character string C of from two to five characters, of which the first must
        be an “S” (for further discussion of POSSREP definitions, see the section “Possible
        Representations” later in this chapter). Note: The CONSTRAINT portion of the POSSREP
        definition is optional; omitting it is equivalent to specifying CONSTRAINT TRUE.

    ■   Fifth, the fact that types are named is important. Types with different names are different
        types (even if they have essentially the same POSSREP definition).
      As noted in Chapter 2, any given type is either system defined (i.e., built in) or user defined,
and we will assume as we did in that chapter that, of the three types mentioned earlier, INTEGER
and CHAR are system defined and S# is user defined. (We remark in passing that the terminology
of system- vs. user-defined types is sanctioned by usage but is not very good. After all, to a user
who merely makes use of some user-defined type—as opposed to the user who is actually
responsible for defining that type—the type in question behaves in all major respects just like a
system-defined one; indeed, that is really the whole point. In other words, the distinction being
sought is not so much one of users vs. the system but, rather, one of users playing different roles in
different contexts.)
      Any given type has an associated set of operators that can be applied to values and variables
of the type in question; i.e., values and variables of a given type can be operated upon solely by
means of the operators defined for that type.1 For example, in the case of the system-defined type
INTEGER:



1
  Actually this observation is tautologous. See the discussion of strong typing in the section “Operators,” later in this
chapter.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        page 57
Part I / Preliminaries                                             Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


    ■    The system provides an assignment operator “:=” for assigning integer values to integer
         variables.

    ■    It also provides operators “=”, “<”, and so on, for comparing integers.

    ■    It also provides operators “+”, “*”, and so on, for performing arithmetic on integers.

    ■    It does not provide operators “||” (concatenate), SUBSTR (substring), and so on, for
         performing string operations on integers; in other words, string operations on integers are not
         supported.

By contrast, in the case of the user-defined type S#, we would certainly define assignment and
comparison operators (“:=”, “=”, “≠”, and so on); however, we would probably not define operators
“+”, “*”, and so on, which would mean that arithmetic on supplier numbers would not be supported
(why would we ever want to add or multiply two supplier numbers?).
       We now proceed to explore the foregoing ideas, and some of their many implications, in
detail.


VALUES ARE TYPED

Every value has, or is of, some type. In other words, if v is a value, then v can be thought of as
carrying around with it a kind of flag that announces “I am an integer” or “I am a supplier number”
or “I am a geometric point” (and so on). Note that, by definition, any given value always has
exactly one type,1 which never changes. It follows that distinct types are disjoint, meaning they
have no values in common. It also follows that everything that denotes or returns a value can be
thought of as having a type as well. To be specific:
    ■    Every variable is explicitly declared to be of some type, meaning that every possible value of
         the variable in question is a value of the type in question (the declared type of that variable).
         For example:
         VAR N INTEGER ;

    ■    Every attribute is explicitly or implicitly declared to be of some type, meaning that every
         possible value of the attribute in question is a value of the type in question (the declared type
         of that attribute). Here are some examples:
         VAR S REAL RELATION { ... STATUS INTEGER, ... } ... ;

         VAR SC VIRTUAL ( S { S#, CITY } ) ;

         EXTEND S ADD ( CHAR_LENGTH ( CITY ) AS CN_LENGTH )

         In the first example, attribute STATUS is explicitly declared to be of type INTEGER; in the


1
    Except possibly if type inheritance is supported.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         page 58
Part I / Preliminaries                                          Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


      second example, attributes S# and CITY are implicitly declared to be of types S# and CHAR,
      respectively (see the discussion of relation type inference at the very end of the section
      “Selectors and THE_ Operators,” later in this chapter); in the third example, attribute
      CN_LENGTH is implicitly declared to be of type INTEGER (since INTEGER is the declared
      type of the CHAR_LENGTH operator—see the bullet item immediately following).

 ■    Every operator that returns a result is explicitly declared to be of some type, meaning that
      every possible result that can be returned by an invocation of the operator in question is a
      value of the type in question (the declared type of that operator). For example:
      OPERATOR ABS ( I INTEGER ) RETURNS INTEGER ;
         RETURN ( IF I  0 THEN +I ELSE -I END IF ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      The specification RETURNS INTEGER means that operator ABS (“absolute value”) is of
      declared type INTEGER—it returns an integer when it is invoked. Note: The RETURN
      statement in this example constitutes the implementation code for operator ABS. Some
      languages, especially ones that support type inheritance, allow that code to be omitted from
      the operator definition and provided “later” (i.e., separately), thereby allowing several distinct
      implementations to be provided for the same operator. See Part IV for further discussion.

 ■    Every parameter of every operator is explicitly declared to be of some type, meaning that
      every possible argument that can be substituted for the parameter in question is a value of the
      type in question (the declared type of that parameter). Operator ABS, for example, has just
      one parameter, I, of declared type INTEGER, and so the following expressions are valid
      invocations of that operator:
      ABS ( N )

      ABS ( ( 3 + N1 ) * N2 )

      (In the first example here, we are assuming that N is a variable of type INTEGER; in the
      second, we are assuming that N1 and N2 are also variables of type INTEGER.)
           Note: Actually, the foregoing paragraph is not quite precise enough. Operators in
      general fall into two disjoint categories, read-only vs. update operators. When a read-only
      operator—ABS is an example—is invoked, it returns a result and does not update anything,
      except possibly for local variables. By contrast, when an update operator is invoked, it does
      update at least one nonlocal variable and it does not return a result; also, of course, anything
      that is to be updated must be a variable, not a value (and if that variable is specified as an
      argument, then it must be of the same type as the corresponding parameter). Here by way of
      example is an update version of ABS:
      OPERATOR ABS ( I INTEGER ) UPDATES { I } ;
         I := ( IF I  0 THEN +I ELSE -I END IF ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      As you can see, this definition includes an UPDATES specification instead of a RETURNS
      specification; that UPDATES specification indicates that parameter I is subject to update,




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 59
Part I / Preliminaries                                           Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


      meaning among other things that arguments corresponding to that parameter must be
      variables specifically. Note that the operator itself is now not typed, since it returns no value,
      and an ABS invocation is thus no longer a valid expression. See the section “Operators” for
      further discussion.

 ■    More generally, every expression is at least implicitly declared to be of some type (the
      declared type of that expression): namely, the type declared for the outermost operator
      involved, where by outermost operator we mean the operator executed last in evaluation of
      the expression in question. For example, the declared type of the expression
      N1 * ( 3 + N2 )

      is the declared type of the operator “*” (multiply).

       Note: The reason we keep using the phrase declared type when the term type, unqualified,
might seem sufficient is that in Part IV of this book we will meet another type, called the most
specific type. Of course, we can and do adopt the convention prior to Part IV that the unqualified
term type means the declared type specifically, barring explicit statements to the contrary; but we
still often use the explicit qualifier declared, for emphasis.

Polymorphic Operators

The foregoing remarks on operator and parameter types need some refinement if the operator in
question is polymorphic. A polymorphic operator is one for which the arguments can be of
different types on different invocations. For example, we might be able to use “||” (concatenate) on
both character strings and bit strings, in which case “||” would be polymorphic. Two obvious and
important examples of polymorphic operators are:

 ■    Equality comparison (“=”): Clearly, we can test any two values v1 and v2 for equality, just
      so long as v1 and v2 are of the same type. Thus, “=” is polymorphic—it applies to integers,
      and to character strings, and to supplier numbers, and in fact to values of every possible type.

 ■    Assignment (“:=”): We can also assign any value v to any variable V, just so long as v and V
      are of the same type. Thus, “:=” is polymorphic also, and it applies to values and variables of
      every type.

      While we are on the subject, there are several more important points to be made in connection
with these two operators:

 1.   To repeat, the Manifesto requires both of them to apply to every type (though SQL does not).
      What is more, it requires them to have the obvious semantics, too (see points 2 and 6 below),
      though again SQL does not.

 2.   The “=” operator might alternatively be called identity, since the comparison v1 = v2
      evaluates to TRUE if and only if v1 and v2 are in fact the very same value.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 60
Part I / Preliminaries                                                        Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


    3.   Equality comparison is of declared type BOOLEAN (it returns a truth value). Assignment,
         being an update operator, has no type.

    4.   For the benefit of readers who might be familiar with object systems, we stress the point that
         assigning value v to variable V really does have the effect in our model of placing (an
         appearance of) that value v in that variable V. In other words, we do not embrace the
         semantics found in some object languages according to which (a) declaring a variable to be of
         type T really means the variable contains the address of some object of type T, and (b)
         “assigning v to V” really means assigning the address of v to V. (In fact, the phrase “the
         address of v” is a contradiction in terms; v, being a value, has no location in time and space
         and thus has no address.)

    5.   Logically speaking, assignment is the only update operator we need—all others are just
         shorthand for certain assignments (we made this point explicitly in the case of relational
         assignment in the previous chapter, but in fact it is true for assignment in general). We have
         argued elsewhere, however (see reference [84]), that the assignment operator we need must be
         what we call a multiple assignment, not the more conventional “single” form. See RM
         Prescription 21 for further explanation.

    6.   The assignment operator is required to satisfy The Assignment Principle, which can be stated
         thus: Following assignment of v to V, the comparison v = V evaluates to TRUE.1


TYPES VS. REPRESENTATIONS

As we saw in Chapter 1, there is a logical difference between (a) a value as such, on the one hand,
and (b) the physical encoding or representation of such a value inside the system, on the other. In
fact, of course, this logical difference is really a consequence of a more fundamental one: namely,
the difference between a type and its physical representation. Types are a model issue, physical
representations are an implementation issue. For example, supplier numbers might be physically
represented as character strings, but it does not follow that we can perform string operations on
supplier numbers; rather, we can perform such operations only if corresponding operators have been
defined for the type. And the operators we define for a given type will depend on the intended
meaning of the type in question, not on the way values of that type happen to be physically
represented—indeed, those physical representations should be hidden from the user. In other
words, the distinction we draw between type and physical representation is one important aspect of
data independence [76].
       We note in passing that data types, especially user-defined ones, are sometimes called
abstract data types (ADTs) in the literature, to stress the foregoing point (the point, that is, that
types must be distinguished from their physical representation). We do not use this term ourselves,
however, because it suggests there might be some types that are not abstract in this sense, and we


1
  Note that this principle applies to relational assignment in particular, though we did not call that fact out explicitly in
the previous chapter. Note too that triggered procedures (especially “INSTEAD OF triggers,” which are supported by
some SQL products, though not at the time of writing by the SQL standard) have the potential to violate the principle.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          page 61
Part I / Preliminaries                                          Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


believe a distinction should always be drawn between a type and its physical representation. Also,
the term abstract type is sometimes used (though not by us) to mean something quite different:
namely, a type such that every value of the type in question must also be a value of some proper
subtype of that type (and a type that is not abstract in this sense is then called a concrete type).
Such matters are discussed and explained further in Part IV of this book.


SCALAR VS. NONSCALAR TYPES

The scalar notion is well established in the languages world. Loosely, we say a type is scalar if it
has no user-visible components, and nonscalar if it is not scalar. We also say that values, variables,
attributes, operators, parameters, and expressions of some type T are scalar or nonscalar according
as that type T itself is scalar or nonscalar. For example:

 ■    Type INTEGER is a scalar type; hence, values and variables (and so on) of type INTEGER
      are also all scalar, meaning they have no user-visible components. Similar remarks apply to
      (e.g.) the user-defined type S#.

 ■    Tuple and relation types are nonscalar—the pertinent user-visible components being, of
      course, the corresponding attributes—and hence tuple and relation values and variables (and
      so on) are also all nonscalar.

       That said, we now have to say too that these notions are quite informal. The truth is, it seems
to be very difficult to come up with a definition of the term scalar that is both precise and useful;
indeed, reference [74] shows that the concept of atomicity—which is just the concept of
“scalarness” by another name—has no absolute meaning. For example, consider the string 'New
York' (a value of type CHAR). If this string is considered to be a single value, then it seems
reasonable to think of it as scalar; but if it is considered to be composite (consisting as it does of a
sequence of either words or letters), then it seems reasonable to think of it as nonscalar.
       For such reasons, we nowhere rely formally in this book on the notion of scalarness.
However, we do make heavy use of the notion informally. To be more specific (and barring explicit
statements to the contrary), we use the term scalar type to mean a type that is neither a tuple type
nor a relation type, and we use the term nonscalar type to mean a type that is either a tuple type or a
relation type. We also use the terms scalar value, nonscalar value, scalar operator, nonscalar
operator, etc., analogously. (By operator here, we mean a read-only operator, of course, since
update operators have no type. We might try saying an update operator is scalar if it updates a
scalar argument—but then we would presumably also have to say an operator that updates both a
scalar and a nonscalar argument is both scalar and nonscalar simultaneously.)


POSSIBLE REPRESENTATIONS

For simplicity, we now assume until further notice that all types are both scalar and user defined,
barring explicit statements to the contrary. Let T be such a type. As we have seen, then, the
physical representation of values of type T is hidden from the user; in fact, such representations can




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 62
Part I / Preliminaries                                                      Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


be arbitrarily complex—in particular, they can have components—but, to repeat, those components
will be hidden from the user. However, we do require that values of type T have at least one
declared possible representation,1 and such possible representations are not hidden from the user;
in particular, they do have user-visible components. Understand, however, that the components in
question are not components of the type, they are components of the possible representation; the
type as such is still scalar in the sense previously explained.
      By way of example, consider the user-defined type QTY (“quantity”), whose definition in
Tutorial D might look like this:
       TYPE QTY POSSREP { I INTEGER } ;

This type definition says, in effect, that quantities can “possibly be represented” by values of the
system-defined type INTEGER (for simplicity, we ignore the fact that, in practice, we would
probably want to constrain those integers to be greater than zero). In this example, therefore, the
possible representation (which henceforth we abbreviate to just possrep) certainly does have user-
visible components2—in fact, it has exactly one such, called I, of type INTEGER—but quantities
per se do not.
      Here is a slightly more complex example:
       TYPE POINT     /* geometric points in two-dimensional space */
            POSSREP CARTESIAN { X RATIONAL, Y RATIONAL }
            POSSREP POLAR { R RATIONAL, THETA RATIONAL } ;

       This definition includes declarations of two distinct possreps, CARTESIAN and POLAR,
reflecting the fact that points in two-dimensional space can indeed “possibly be represented” by
either cartesian or polar coordinates. Each of those possreps in turn has two components, both of
which are of type RATIONAL3 and both of which are user visible. Like type QTY, however, type
POINT is still scalar—the type as such has no user-visible components.
       Despite the message of the previous paragraph, we must now say that it is often convenient,
informally, to refer to the components of a given possrep as if they were in fact components of the
type. For example, we might refer, informally, to the x and y coordinates of some point (instead of
what we should be doing, which is referring to the x and y coordinates of the cartesian possible
representation of that point). Please note immediately that this usage is more than a little sloppy—
but, to repeat, it is convenient, and we will adopt it from time to time in what follows.


1
  We assume here that T is not a dummy type. Dummy types have to do with our inheritance model and are discussed
in Part IV of this book; we ignore them until further notice.
2
  As we have had occasion to remark before (in connection with the terminology of user-defined types), the term user is
always a little vague, and you might be wondering just what we mean when we say that possrep components are “user
visible.” Essentially, what we mean is that any user who needs to invoke a selector or THE_ operator effectively needs
to be aware of the corresponding possrep components, since (as we will see later, in the section “Selectors and THE_
Operators”) selectors and THE_ operators are defined in terms of those components. Furthermore, in the case of
selectors in particular, the user will need to be aware of the corresponding type constraint, and type constraints also are
defined in terms of possrep components.
3
  Throughout this book we use the more accurate RATIONAL in place of the more usual REAL (and we assume it is a
built-in type).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       page 63
Part I / Preliminaries                                          Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


       A note on syntax: First of all, if possrep PR is declared as part of the definition of type T, we
say, loosely, that “PR is a possrep for type T” (instead of, as would be more logically correct, “PR is
a possrep for values of type T”). In Tutorial D, moreover, if type T has a possrep with no explicit
name, then that possrep is named T by default. Thus, the definition already given for type QTY—
      TYPE QTY POSSREP { I INTEGER } ;

—can be regarded as shorthand for the following longer one:
      TYPE QTY POSSREP QTY { I INTEGER } ;

      Further discussion of possreps—in particular, an explanation of our motivation for
introducing the concept—can be found under RM Prescriptions 4 and 5 in Chapter 6. See also
Appendix C.


SELECTORS AND THE_ OPERATORS

Let PR be a possrep for type T. Then the declaration of PR causes automatic definition of the
following more or less self-explanatory operators:

 ■    A selector operator, which allows the user to specify or select a value of type T by supplying
      a value for each component of PR

 ■    A set of THE_ operators (one such operator for each component of PR), which allow the user
      to access the PR components corresponding to a specified value of type T

      Note: When we say declaration of PR causes “automatic definition” of these operators, what
we mean is that whoever is responsible for defining type T, and therefore for declaring PR, is also
responsible for defining the operators. Observe, therefore, that automatic does not necessarily mean
automated. (To be a little more precise, we do not necessarily expect the implementation code for
selectors and THE_ operators to be provided automatically; however, we do expect it to be provided
automatically for certain other required operators, including “=” and “:=” in particular.)
      By way of example, here are some sample selector and THE_ operator invocations for type
POINT:
      CARTESIAN ( 5.0, 2.5 )
      /* selects the point with x = 5.0, y = 2.5 */

      CARTESIAN ( X1, Y1 )
      /* selects the point with x = X1, y = Y1, where */
      /* X1 and Y1 are variables of type RATIONAL     */

      POLAR ( 2.7, 1.0 )
      /* selects the point with r = 2.7,  = 1.0 */

      THE_X ( P )
      /* denotes the x coordinate of the point in */
      /* P, where P is a variable of type POINT   */




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 64
Part I / Preliminaries                                                     Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


       THE_R ( P )
       /* denotes the r coordinate of the point in P */

       THE_Y ( exp )
       /* denotes the y coordinate of the point denoted */
       /* by the expression exp (which is of type POINT) */

       Note that (a) selectors have the same name as the corresponding possrep; (b) THE_ operators
have names of the form THE_C, where C is the name of the corresponding component of the
corresponding possrep; (c) the syntax of selector and THE_ operator invocations is self-explanatory.
Note too that selector invocations are a generalization of the familiar concept of a literal. (All
literals are selector invocations, but not all selector invocations are literals; in fact, a selector
invocation is a literal if and only if all of its arguments are literals in turn.)
       A note regarding the term “literal”: The concept might be familiar, but it seems to be very
hard to find a good definition for it in the literature! Here is our own preferred definition: A literal
is a symbol that denotes a value that is fixed and determined by the particular symbol in question
(and the type of that value is therefore also fixed and determined by the symbol in question).
Loosely, we can say that a literal is self-defining. Here are some Tutorial D examples:
       4                                            /* a literal of type INTEGER                 */
       2.7                                          /* a literal of type RATIONAL */
       'ABC'                                        /* a literal of type CHAR                    */
       FALSE                                        /* a literal of type BOOLEAN                 */
       S#('S1')                                     /* a literal of type S#                      */
       CARTESIAN ( 5.0, 2.5 )                       /* a literal of type POINT                   */

      We remark in passing that our model explicitly requires every value of every type, be it scalar
or nonscalar, to be denotable by means of some literal (see RM Prescription 4).
      Back to selectors and THE_ operators. To see how these ideas might work in practice,
suppose the physical representation of points is in fact cartesian coordinates (though there is no
need, in general, for a physical representation to be identical to any of the corresponding possreps).
Then the system will provide certain highly protected operators,1 denoted in what follows by italic
pseudocode, that effectively expose that physical representation, and the type implementer can then
use those operators to implement the necessary CARTESIAN and POLAR selectors. (Obviously
the type implementer is—in fact, must be—an exception to the general rule that users are not aware
of physical representations.) For example:




1
  Just what is involved in protecting those operators, thereby making them unavailable to most users, is essentially a
security matter and beyond the purview of the Manifesto as such. For our purposes, we simply assume that excluding
them from Tutorial D is sufficient to provide the necessary protection.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     page 65
Part I / Preliminaries                                     Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


      OPERATOR CARTESIAN ( X RATIONAL, Y RATIONAL ) RETURNS POINT ;
          BEGIN ;
              VAR P POINT ; /* P is a variable of type POINT */
              X component of physical representation of P := X ;
              Y component of physical representation of P := Y ;
              RETURN ( P ) ;
          END ;
      END OPERATOR ;
      OPERATOR POLAR ( R RATIONAL, THETA RATIONAL ) RETURNS POINT ;
          RETURN ( CARTESIAN ( R * COS ( THETA ),
                              R * SIN ( THETA ) ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

     Observe that the POLAR definition makes use of the CARTESIAN selector, as well as the
presumably built-in operators SIN and COS. Alternatively, the POLAR definition might be
expressed directly in terms of the protected operators, thus:
      OPERATOR POLAR ( R RATIONAL, THETA RATIONAL ) RETURNS POINT ;
          BEGIN ;
              VAR P POINT ;
              X component of physical representation of P := R * COS ( THETA ) ;
              Y component of physical representation of P := R * SIN ( THETA ) ;
              RETURN ( P ) ;
          END ;
      END OPERATOR ;

    The type implementer can also use those protected operators to implement the necessary
THE_ operators, thus:
      OPERATOR THE_X ( P POINT ) RETURNS RATIONAL ;
          RETURN ( X component of physical representation of P ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      OPERATOR THE_Y ( P POINT ) RETURNS RATIONAL ;
          RETURN ( Y component of physical representation of P ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      OPERATOR THE_R ( P POINT ) RETURNS RATIONAL ;
          RETURN ( SQRT ( THE_X ( P ) ** 2 + THE_Y ( P ) ** 2 ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      OPERATOR THE_THETA ( P POINT ) RETURNS RATIONAL ;
          RETURN ( ARCTAN ( THE_Y ( P ) / THE_X ( P ) ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      Observe that the definitions of THE_R and THE_THETA make use of THE_X and THE_Y,
as well as the operators SQRT and ARCTAN (which, we assume, are built in and have the obvious
semantics). Alternatively, THE_R and THE_THETA might be defined directly in terms of the
protected operators (details left as an exercise).
      So much for the POINT example. However, it is important to understand that all of the
concepts we have discussed in connection with that example apply to simpler types as well (type
QTY, for example). Here are some sample selector invocations for that type:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                              page 66
Part I / Preliminaries                                            Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


      QTY ( 100 )
      QTY ( N )
      QTY ( N1 + N2 )

And here are some sample THE_ operator invocations:
      THE_I ( Q )

      THE_I ( Q1 + Q2 )

We are assuming in these examples that (a) N, N1, and N2 are variables of type INTEGER; (b) Q,
Q1, and Q2 are variables of type QTY; and (c) “+” is a polymorphic operator—it applies to both
integers and quantities.
      By the way, observe that since values are always typed, it is strictly incorrect to say that, e.g.,
“the quantity for a certain shipment is 100.” A quantity is a value of type QTY, not a value of type
INTEGER! In the example, therefore, we should more properly say the quantity is QTY(100), not
100 as such. In informal contexts, however, we usually do not bother to be quite so precise, thus
using, e.g., 100 as a convenient shorthand for QTY(100). In particular, we typically use such
shorthands when we draw pictures of relations as tables (e.g., on paper), as we saw in several
examples in Chapters 1 and 2.
      We give one further example of a type definition:
      TYPE LINESEG POSSREP { BEGIN POINT, END POINT } ;

Type LINESEG denotes line segments, and it has associated THE_ operators THE_BEGIN and
THE_END (each of which is type POINT). This example thus illustrates the fact that a given
possrep can be declared in terms of user-defined types, not just system-defined types as in all of our
previous examples (in other words, a user-defined type is indeed a type and can be used in all of the
ways that types in general can be used).
      For simplicity, we assume throughout this book from this point forward that all operators with
names of the form THE_C (for some C) are indeed THE_ operators of the kind we have been
discussing.

THE_ Pseudovariables

Consider the following example:
      VAR P POINT ;
      P := CARTESIAN ( 5.0, 2.5 ) ;
      THE_X ( P ) := 2.0 ;

Explanation: Variable P is declared to be of type POINT, and the first assignment assigns to that
variable P the point with x coordinate 5.0 and y coordinate 2.5. The second assignment then “zaps”
the x coordinate of P, setting it to 2.0, so that P now contains the point with x coordinate 2.0 and y
coordinate 2.5 (unchanged).
       The expression THE_X(P) on the left side of the second assignment in the foregoing example
is a pseudovariable reference: a THE_ pseudovariable reference, to be precise (other kinds are




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       page 67
Part I / Preliminaries                                                       Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


possible).1 In general, a pseudovariable reference is an operational expression that appears in some
target position (e.g., on the left side of an assignment); thus, a THE_ pseudovariable reference in
particular is a THE_ operator invocation appearing in such a target position. Such an invocation
actually designates—instead of just returning the value of—the specified component of its
argument. (More precisely, it designates the specified component of the applicable possible
representation of that argument.) Thus, the assignment
         THE_X ( P ) := 2.0 ;

actually assigns the value 2.0 to the X component of the argument variable P.
      Pseudovariable references can be nested, as in this example:
         VAR LS LINESEG ;
         THE_X ( THE_BEGIN ( LS ) ) := 6.5 ;

      More generally, in fact, a pseudovariable reference can appear wherever a variable reference
of the same type can appear. In other words, pseudovariables are variables (loosely speaking).
      We now observe that pseudovariables in general, including THE_ pseudovariables in
particular, are in fact logically unnecessary, because any assignment in which the target is a
pseudovariable is logically equivalent to another in which it is not. Consider the following example
once again:
         THE_X ( P ) := 2.0 ;

This assignment is logically equivalent to the following one:
         P := CARTESIAN ( 2.0, THE_Y ( P ) ) ;

Similarly, the assignment
         THE_X ( THE_BEGIN ( LS ) ) := 6.5 ;

is logically equivalent to this one:
         LS := LINESEG ( CARTESIAN ( 6.5, THE_Y ( THE_BEGIN ( LS ) ) ),
                                          THE_END ( LS ) ) ;

       In other words, THE_ pseudovariables per se are not strictly necessary in order to support the
kind of component-level updating we have been discussing. However, assignment to a THE_
pseudovariable does seem intuitively more attractive than the alternative (for which it can be
regarded as a shorthand); also, using THE_ pseudovariables provides a higher degree of
imperviousness to changes in the syntax of the corresponding selector. Moreover, assignment to a
pseudovariable is likely to be easier to implement efficiently than the alternative for which it is a
shorthand (though of course performance issues are never a primary consideration in our model, nor
in the design of the language D).


1
    The term pseudovariable is taken from PL/I; virtual variable might be a little more apt.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              page 68
Part I / Preliminaries                                                      Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


Nonscalar Types

We now turn briefly to tuple and relation types.1 We focus first on tuple types specifically. Here
repeated from Chapter 2 is an example of such a type:
       TUPLE { S# S#, SNAME NAME, STATUS INTEGER, CITY CHAR }

       Now, tuple types do not have possreps as such; nor do they really need them, because the type
itself can be regarded as playing a kind of “possrep” role. In other words, just as we can behave as
if values of type QTY (say) were physically represented by integers, so in the case at hand we can
behave as if values of the tuple type shown were physically represented by tuples of that type. For
example, here is a selector invocation for that tuple type (also repeated from Chapter 2):
       TUPLE { S# S#('S1'), SNAME NAME('Smith'), STATUS 20, CITY 'London' }

       Observe how the syntax of this selector supports the idea that the tuple type serves as its own
possrep (as it were), because it relies on the fact that the components of that type—i.e., the
attributes—are indeed user visible.
       As for “THE_ operators,” tuple types neither have nor need them; instead, their functionality
is provided by what Tutorial D calls attribute extractors. For example, if tx is an expression of the
tuple type under discussion, then the expression
       STATUS FROM tx

returns the corresponding STATUS value, just as a hypothetical “THE_STATUS” operator would.
Note: It would be possible to use attribute extractors as pseudovariables, too, but Tutorial D does
not; instead, it provides analogous functionality by means of statements of the form illustrated here:
       UPDATE tv ( STATUS := 15 ) ;

      This statement has the effect of setting the STATUS component of the tuple variable tv
(which we assume to be of the tuple type under discussion, of course) to the value 15. It is
shorthand for the following:
       tv := TUPLE { S# S# FROM tv , SNAME SNAME FROM tv ,
                     STATUS 15 , CITY CITY FROM tv } ;

       A note on tuple type inference: One important advantage of the tuple type naming scheme
prescribed in the Manifesto—viz., that such names be of the form TUPLE{...}—is that it facilitates
the task of determining the type of the result of an arbitrary tuple expression. For example, consider
the following tuple expression (actually a tuple projection):
       tx { S#, CITY }

where tx is as above. This particular expression evaluates to a tuple that is derived from the current

1
  Such types are in fact generated types. See the section “Type Generators,” later in this chapter, for further
explanation of this point.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       page 69
Part I / Preliminaries                                                       Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


value of tx by “projecting away” attributes SNAME and STATUS, and the tuple type of that derived
tuple is, precisely,
        TUPLE { S# S#, CITY CHAR }

Similar remarks apply to all possible tuple expressions.
      Finally, everything in this subsection regarding tuple types applies equally well to relation
types also, mutatis mutandis.1 Thus, each relation type serves as its own possrep (as it were); the
corresponding selector relies on the fact that components of the type are user visible; and operators
are available that provide read-only and update access to any attribute of any tuple in any relation of
the type in question (speaking rather loosely!). We omit further discussion here—except to point
out that, with regard to the question of relation type inference specifically, we have already
indicated what is involved in our explanation of the relational operators in Chapter 2. For example,
the type of the result of the expression a UNION b is the same as that of both a and b.


SYSTEM-DEFINED TYPES

We assumed for the most part in the previous two sections that the scalar types we were dealing
with were all user defined. But what about built-in types? Well, almost certainly there will be
some built-in types that comply with everything we said in those sections. For example, we might
have a built-in type called DATE, representing dates on the Gregorian calendar. Then:

    ■   An obvious possrep for dates is:
        POSSREP { YEAR INTEGER, MONTH INTEGER, DAY INTEGER CONSTRAINT ... }

        (Details of the CONSTRAINT specification, which would be needed in practice to ensure that
        dates conform to the rules of the Gregorian calendar, are tedious but straightforward and are
        therefore omitted here.)

    ■   The corresponding selector would take the form
        DATE ( y, m, d )

        where y, m, and d are integer expressions.

    ■   The corresponding THE_ operators might look like this (though for historical reasons they
        will probably use some different syntax):




1
  In case you are not familiar with this useful expression, we offer a brief explanation here. Essentially, it means with
all necessary changes having been made (and it can save a good deal of writing). In the case at hand, for example, the
“necessary changes” involve such things as replacing appearances of the term tuple by the term relation, replacing tuple
selector invocations by relation selector invocations, replacing references to tuple variables by references to relvars, and
so on.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        page 70
Part I / Preliminaries                                          Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


      THE_YEAR ( d )
      THE_MONTH ( d )
      THE_DAY ( d )

      where d is an expression (or a variable, if the THE_ operator invocation is being used as a
      pseudovariable reference) of type DATE.

       We remark in passing that type DATE is an example of a built-in type that might have several
distinct possreps. For example, a possrep involving month names instead of numbers might be
desirable from a human factors point of view. (And the physical representation is likely to be
different again; it might, for example, consist of “day number since the beginning of time.”)
       What about a simpler built-in type such as INTEGER? Well, clearly the system has to specify
a format for writing integer literals—probably as an optionally signed sequence of decimal digits, as
in Tutorial D. By definition, then, that format can be regarded as a “possrep for integers,” in a
sense. However, we take the position that the possrep in question is not a declared one. Everything
we have said about possreps in this chapter so far applies specifically to ones that are explicitly
declared; in particular, our earlier remarks regarding selectors and THE_ operators apply
specifically to possreps that are explicitly declared, but not to ones that are not. In our example,
then, type INTEGER has no declared possrep, and therefore no THE_ operators. It does have a
selector, but invocations of that selector are always simple integer literals, nothing more general.
       Incidentally, just as type DATE might well have several distinct possreps, so type INTEGER
might have several distinct literal formats (in other words, several distinct selectors). For example,
15, X'F', and B'1111' might be distinct integer literals, all denoting the value fifteen.
       From this point forward, we will take the unqualified term possible representation, or the
abbreviated form possrep, to refer to a declared possrep specifically (barring explicit statements to
the contrary).


OPERATORS

We have already seen several examples of operator definitions in this chapter, but it is time to take a
closer look. We begin by repeating the two versions of ABS (“absolute value”) from the section
“Values Are Typed” earlier in the chapter. For clarity, however, we now rename them R_ABS and
U_ABS, respectively:
      OPERATOR R_ABS ( I INTEGER ) RETURNS INTEGER ;
          RETURN ( IF I  0 THEN +I ELSE -I END IF ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      OPERATOR U_ABS ( I INTEGER ) UPDATES { I } ;
          I := ( IF I  0 THEN +I ELSE -I END IF ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      An invocation of R_ABS—e.g., R_ABS(N1+N2)—is an expression of type INTEGER, and it
can appear wherever an integer literal would be allowed; in particular, it can be nested inside other
expressions. An invocation of U_ABS, by contrast, is not an expression at all (not of type
INTEGER and not of any other type), and it cannot be nested inside other expressions; instead, such




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 71
Part I / Preliminaries                                            Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


an invocation takes the form of an explicit CALL statement, or something logically equivalent to
such a statement. For example:
      CALL U_ABS ( N ) ;

N here must be a variable specifically (of type INTEGER), not some more general expression.
      Why do we distinguish between read-only and update operators? Without getting into too
much detail—further elaboration can be found in Chapter 6, also Chapter 14—the answer has to do
with avoiding side effects. For example, if an expression such as N1+U_ABS(N2) were valid, it
would not only return some integer value but would also have the side effect of updating the
variable N2.
      Here is another example, DIST (“distance between”). This read-only operator takes two
parameters of one user-defined type (POINT) and returns a result of another (LENGTH):
      OPERATOR DIST ( P1 POINT, P2 POINT ) RETURNS LENGTH ;
         RETURN ( WITH THE_X ( P1 ) AS X1 ,
                       THE_X ( P2 ) AS X2 ,
                       THE_Y ( P1 ) AS Y1 ,
                       THE_Y ( P2 ) AS Y2 :
                LENGTH ( SQRT ( ( X1 - X2 ) ** 2 + ( Y1 - Y2 ) ** 2 ) ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

       We are assuming that the LENGTH selector takes an argument of type RATIONAL. Also,
recall from the previous chapter that the purpose of WITH is to simplify the formulation of
expressions by allowing names to be introduced to refer to the results of subexpressions. See
Chapter 5 for further details.
       Our next example is the required “=” operator for type POINT:
      OPERATOR EQ ( P1 POINT, P2 POINT ) RETURNS BOOLEAN ;
         RETURN ( THE_X ( P1 ) = THE_X ( P2 ) AND THE_Y ( P1 ) = THE_Y ( P2 ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      Observe that the expression in the RETURN statement here makes use of the built-in “=”
operator for type RATIONAL. For simplicity, we will assume from this point forward that the
usual infix notation “=” can be used for the equality operator (for all types, that is, not just type
POINT); we omit consideration of how such an infix notation might be specified, since it is
basically just a matter of syntax. Note: In practice, we would expect the code for “=” to be
provided by the system (again, for all types, not just for type POINT); we show an explicit
definition above for type POINT only for pedagogic reasons.
      Here now is the required “<” operator for type QTY:
      OPERATOR LT ( Q1 QTY, Q2 QTY ) RETURNS BOOLEAN ;
          RETURN ( THE_I ( Q1 ) < THE_I ( Q2 ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      We are assuming here, reasonably enough, that QTY has been defined as an ordinal type—




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       page 72
Part I / Preliminaries                                                     Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


an ordinal type being, precisely, a type for which the operator “<” is defined.1 Note that the
expression in the RETURN statement makes use of the built-in “<” operator for type INTEGER.
Again, we will assume from this point forward that the usual infix notation can be used for this
operator (for all ordinal types, that is, not just type QTY). Note: There is quite a lot more that
would be need to be said and done in connection with ordinal types in any real implementation. In
particular, an argument could be made that some types for which “<” is supported are not really
usable for typical ordinal purposes (type CHAR might be a case in point). Such considerations are
beyond the scope of the present book, however; see reference [85] for further discussion.

Type Conversions

Consider the following definition for type S# (a simplified version of the definition shown earlier in
the chapter):
       TYPE S# POSSREP { C CHAR } ;

By default, the specified possrep has the name S#, and hence the corresponding selector operator
does, too. The following is thus a valid selector invocation:
       S#('S1')

(it returns a certain supplier number). Observe, therefore, that the S# selector might be regarded,
loosely, as a type conversion operator that converts character strings to supplier numbers.
Analogously, the P# selector might be regarded as a conversion operator that converts character
strings to part numbers; the QTY selector might be regarded as a conversion operator that converts
integers to quantities; and so on.
       Incidentally, we follow convention in using the term type conversion here, but it is not a good
term. After all, to say a character string is being “converted” to a supplier number suggests the
character string is being changed somehow, but such is not the case (of course not!—the character
string is a value and cannot be changed in any way, by definition). Indeed, to suggest that two
values are really the same in all respects except that they happen to be of different types is to appeal
to some concept that is certainly not part of our model. Rather, what is really going on with “type
conversion” is that a mapping is being applied, a mapping from values of one type to values of
another. Given a particular character string, for example, the mapping in question identifies the
unique supplier number that corresponds to that string.
       Back to selectors in particular. Of course, we can think, loosely, of the S# selector as being a
“type conversion” operator only because the corresponding possrep happens to involve exactly one
component. In that special case, however, we can also think (again loosely) of the corresponding
THE_ operator as an operator that performs type conversion in the opposite direction. For example,
if SID is a variable of type S#, then the expression
       THE_C ( SID )


1
  Tutorial D requires ordinal types to be explicitly declared as such, via the specification ORDINAL in the type
definition. We omit such specifications from our examples in this chapter for simplicity. Of course, not all types are
ordinal; type POINT, for example, is not, and neither are tuple or relation types.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     page 73
Part I / Preliminaries                                                     Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


effectively converts the supplier number denoted by SID to a character string.
        Now, in the section “Values Are Typed” earlier in the chapter, we said that (a) the source and
target in an assignment must be of the same type, and (b) the comparands in an equality comparison
must also be of the same type. In some systems, however, these rules are not directly enforced; that
is, it might be possible in such a system to request, e.g., a comparison between a supplier number
and a character string, perhaps as here:
       ... WHERE S# = 'S2'

Here the left comparand is of type S# and the right comparand is of type CHAR. On the face of it,
therefore, the comparison should fail on a type error (a compile-time type error, in fact).
Conceptually, however, it would be possible for the system to realize that it can use the S#
“conversion operator"—i.e., the S# selector—to convert the CHAR comparand to type S#, thereby
effectively rewriting the comparison as follows:
       ... WHERE S# = S#('S2')

Alternatively, it could use the THE_C “conversion operator” instead to rewrite the comparison thus:
       ... WHERE THE_C ( S# ) = 'S2'

Either way, the comparison will now be valid.
      Invoking a conversion operator implicitly as in the foregoing examples is known as coercion.
However, it is well known that coercion can lead to errors. In this book, therefore, we follow The
Principle of Cautious design [46] and adopt the position that coercions are not permitted—operands
must always be of the appropriate types, not merely coercible to those types. Of course, we do
allow explicit type conversion operators (or CAST operators, as they are usually known) to be
defined and invoked when necessary. For example:
       CAST_AS_CHAR ( 530 )

As we have already pointed out, selectors—at least, those that take just one argument—can also be
thought of as explicit type conversion operators, of a kind, and a similar remark applies to the
corresponding THE_ operators.
      Now, you might have realized that what we are talking about here is what is known in
language circles as strong typing. Different writers have slightly different definitions for this term
[125]; as we use it, however, it means, among other things, that (a) every value has a type, and (b)
whenever we try to perform an operation, the system checks—preferably at compile time, otherwise
at run time—that the operands are of the right types for the operation in question.1 For example,
consider the following expressions:
       WEIGHT + QTY         /* part weight plus shipment quantity                      */

       WEIGHT * QTY         /* part weight times shipment quantity */


1
  In fact, OO Prescription 1 requires D to be such that all type checking can be done at compile time, except possibly if
type inheritance is supported.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                      page 74
Part I / Preliminaries                                             Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


The first expression makes no sense, and the system should reject it. The second, on the other hand,
does make sense—it denotes the total weight for all parts involved in the shipment. So the
operators we would define for weights and quantities in combination would presumably include “*”
but not “+”.
      Here are a couple more examples, involving comparison operations this time:
      WEIGHT > QTY

      EVEN > ODD

Again the first expression does not make sense, but the second does. (We are assuming in the
second example that EVEN is of type EVEN_INTEGER and ODD is of type ODD_INTEGER,
with the obvious semantics.) So the operators we would define for weights and quantities in
combination presumably would not include “>“, but those for even and odd integers presumably
would. Note: In practice EVEN_INTEGER and ODD_INTEGER might both be subtypes of type
INTEGER, in which case the “>“ operator would probably be inherited from this latter type (see
Part IV).

Some Implications

Complete support for operators along the lines sketched in the present section has a number of
significant implications, which we now briefly summarize:

 ■    First, and most important, it means the system will know (a) exactly which expressions are
      valid, and (b) the type of the result for every valid expression.

 ■    It also means that the total collection of types known to the system will be a closed set; that
      is, the type of the result of every valid expression will be a type that is known to the system.
      Observe in particular that this closed set of types must include the type BOOLEAN, if
      comparisons are to be valid expressions [77].

 ■    In particular, the fact that the system knows the type of the result of every valid expression
      means it knows which assignments are valid, and also which comparisons.


TYPE GENERATORS

We turn now to types that are obtained by invoking some type generator. Abstractly, a type
generator is just a special kind of operator; it is special because (a) it returns a type instead of, e.g.,
a scalar value, and (b) the invocation occurs at compile time instead of run time. For example, we
might write
      VAR SALES ARRAY QTY (12) ;

to define a variable called SALES whose permitted values are one-dimensional arrays of 12




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         page 75
Part I / Preliminaries                                                     Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


quantities.1 In this example, the expression ARRAY QTY (12) can be regarded as an invocation of
the ARRAY type generator, and it returns a specific array type. That specific array type is a
generated type (a nonscalar generated type, as it happens, though scalar generated types are
possible too). Points arising:
    1.   Type generators are known by many different names in the literature: type constructors,
         parameterized types, polymorphic types, type templates, generic types, possibly others too.

    2.   Generated types are indeed types, and can be used wherever ordinary (nongenerated) types
         can be used. For example, we might define some relvar to have some attribute of type
         ARRAY QTY (12). By contrast, type generators as such are not types.

    3.   Like types, type generators can be either system or user defined, in general. In other words,
         the system might allow users to define their own type generators (though we do not require D
         to support such functionality, and Tutorial D in particular does not do so).

    4.   A generated type is system or user defined according as the corresponding type generator is
         system or user defined.

      In general, generated types have possreps—or, at least, can be thought of as having
possreps—that are derived in a fairly obvious way from (a) a generic possrep that applies to the
type generator in question and (b) the user-visible component(s) of the specific generated type in
question. In the case of ARRAY QTY (12), for example:

    ■    There will be some generic possrep defined for one-dimensional arrays in general: probably
         as a sequence of array elements that can be identified by subscripts in the range from lower to
         upper, where lower and upper are the applicable bounds (1 and 12, in our example).

    ■    The user-visible components are precisely the 12 array elements just mentioned.

      In like manner, there will be operators that provide the required selector and THE_ operator
functionality. For example, the expression (actually an array literal)
         ARRAY QTY ( QTY( 2), QTY( 5), QTY( 9), QTY( 9),
               QTY(15), QTY(27), QTY(33), QTY(32),
               QTY(25), QTY(19), QTY( 5), QTY( 1) )

might be used to specify a particular value of type ARRAY QTY (12) (“selector functionality”).
Likewise, the expression
         SALES (3)

might be used to access the third component (i.e., the third array element) of the array value that


1
  The examples in this section are not formulated in terms of pure Tutorial D because Tutorial D does not support
general-purpose arrays—but arrays are such a familiar construct that it seemed a good idea to use them as a basis for
this discussion.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     page 76
Part I / Preliminaries                                                     Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


happens to be the current value of the array variable SALES (“THE_ operator functionality”). It
might also be used as a pseudovariable reference, as here:
         SALES (3) := QTY(17) ;

     Assignment and equality comparison operators also apply to values and variables of the
generated type. For example, here is a valid assignment:
         SALES := ARRAY QTY ( QTY( 2), QTY( 5), QTY( 9), QTY( 9),
                        QTY(15), QTY(27), QTY(33), QTY(32),
                        QTY(25), QTY(19), QTY( 5), QTY( 1) ) ;

And here is a valid equality comparison:
         SALES = ARRAY QTY ( QTY( 2), QTY( 5), QTY( 9), QTY( 9),
                             QTY(15), QTY(27), QTY(33), QTY(32),
                             QTY(25), QTY(19), QTY( 5), QTY( 1) )

      Note: Any given type generator will also have a set of generic constraints and generic
operators associated with it (generic in the sense that the constraints and operators in question will
apply to every specific type obtained via invocation of the type generator in question). For
example, in the case of the ARRAY type generator:

    ■    There might be a generic constraint to the effect that the lower bound must not be greater than
         the upper bound.

    ■    There might be a generic “reverse” operator that takes an arbitrary one-dimensional array as
         input and returns as output another such array containing the elements of the given one in
         reverse order.

In fact, the “selectors,” “THE_ operators,” and assignment and equality comparison operators
already discussed are also effectively derived from certain generic operators.
      Of course, the type generators that are of particular interest in this book are TUPLE and
(especially) RELATION. See Chapters 4-6 for further discussion.


CONCLUDING REMARKS

As noted in earlier, the material of this chapter is likely to be less familiar to many readers than that
of Chapter 2 was. It is therefore worth summarizing the main points we have covered.
      First of all, a type is a named, finite set of values: namely, the set of all values that satisfy a
certain type constraint, which is specified in Tutorial D, in the case of scalar types specifically, by
a POSSREP definition and its subordinate CONSTRAINT specification.1 Every type has an
associated set of read-only and update operators for operating on values and variables of the type in
question. Values and variables are always typed; so also are attributes, (read-only) operators,
parameters, and more generally expressions of arbitrary complexity.

1
    We will encounter another method of specifying type constraints when we get to Part IV of this book.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                page 77
Part I / Preliminaries                                         Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


       Types can be arbitrarily complex; thus, we can have types whose values are numbers, or
strings, or dates, or times, or audio recordings, or maps, or video recordings, or XML documents, or
geometric points (and so on). Types constrain operations, in that the operands to any given
operation are required to be of the types defined for that operation (strong typing). Strong typing is
a good idea because it allows certain errors to be caught (preferably at compile time, otherwise at
run time).
       Types can be system or user defined; they can also be scalar or nonscalar. A scalar type has
no user-visible components. (The most important nonscalar types in the relational model are
relation types, which were discussed in Chapter 2.) We distinguish between types and their physical
representation (types are a model issue, physical representations are an implementation issue).
However, we do require that user-defined scalar types in particular have at least one explicitly
declared possible representation or “possrep.” Each such possrep causes automatic definition of
one selector operator and, for each component of that possrep, one THE_ operator (also a
corresponding THE_ pseudovariable). We support explicit type conversions but no implicit
coercions. We also support the definition of any number of additional operators for scalar types,
and we require that equality comparison (“=”) and assignment be available for every type (with
prescribed semantics).
       We also discussed type generators, which are compile-time operators that return types
(ARRAY is a typical example, though not one that is supported in Tutorial D). Generated types
have possreps (of a kind), constraints, and operators that are derived from the generic possreps,
constraints, and operators associated with the applicable type generator.
       One final point (not mentioned explicitly in the body of the chapter): Recall from Chapter 1
that values—and hence sets of values also—“have no location in time or space”; conceptually, those
sets of values already exist, and always will exist (think of type INTEGER, for example). It follows
in particular that the operation that defines a scalar type (the TYPE statement, in Tutorial D) does
not actually create the corresponding set of values; all it does is introduce a name by which that set
of values can be referenced. Likewise, the operation that destroys a scalar type (DROP TYPE in
Tutorial D) does not actually destroy the corresponding set of values, it merely drops the name that
was introduced by the corresponding type definition.


EXERCISES

3.1    What is a type?

3.2    What is a literal?

3.3    State the rules regarding operand types for the assignment (“:=”) and equality comparison
       (“=”) operators.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   page 78
Part I / Preliminaries                                         Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


3.4    Elaborate on the following logical differences:

       argument                    vs. parameter
       generated type              vs. nongenerated type
       physical representation     vs. possible representation
       read-only operator          vs. update operator
       scalar                      vs. nonscalar
       type                        vs. representation
       user-defined type           vs. system-defined type
       user-defined operator       vs. system-defined operator

3.5    Why is it desirable to distinguish between read-only and update operators?

3.6    Explain the following in your own words: coercion; ordinal type; polymorphic operator;
       pseudovariable; selector; strong typing; THE_ operator; type generator.

3.7    Why are pseudovariables logically unnecessary?

3.8    Give some examples of polymorphic operators. Are the operators of the relational algebra
       polymorphic? What about aggregate operators such as SUM?

3.9    Define an operator that, given a rational number, returns the cube of that number.

3.10   Define a read-only operator that, given a point with cartesian coordinates x and y, returns the
       point with cartesian coordinates f(x) and g(y), where f and g are predefined operators (of
       type RATIONAL in each case).

3.11   Repeat Exercise 3.10 but make the operator an update operator.

3.12   Give a type definition for a scalar type called CIRCLE whose values are circles in two-
       dimensional euclidean space. What selectors and THE_ operators apply to this type? Also:

       a.   Define a set of read-only operators to compute the diameter, circumference, and area of
            a given circle.

       b.   Define an update operator to double the radius of a given circle (more precisely, to
            update a given variable of type CIRCLE in such a way that its circle value is unchanged
            except that the radius is twice what it was before).

3.13   Give some examples of types for which it might be useful to define two or more distinct
       possreps. Can you think of an example where distinct possreps for the same type have
       different numbers of components?

3.14   Give an appropriate set of scalar type definitions for the suppliers-and-parts database. Do
       not attempt to write the relvar definitions.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 79
Part I / Preliminaries                                           Chapter 3 / Toward a Theory of Types


3.15   We pointed out in the section “Selectors and THE_ Operators” in this chapter that it is
       strictly incorrect to say that (e.g.) the quantity for a certain shipment is 100 (“a quantity is a
       value of type QTY, not a value of type INTEGER”). As a consequence, Fig. 2.1 (in Chapter
       2) is rather sloppy, inasmuch as it pretends that it is correct to think of, e.g., quantities as
       integers. Given your answer to Exercise 3.14, show the correct way of referring to the
       various scalar values in that figure.

3.16   Given your answer to Exercise 3.14, which of the following scalar expressions are valid?
       For those that are, state the type of the result; for the others, show an expression that will
       achieve what appears to be the desired effect.
       a.    CITY = 'London'
       b.    SNAME || PNAME
       c.    QTY * 100
       d.    QTY + 100
       e.    STATUS + 5
       f.    'ABC' < CITY
       g.    COLOR = CITY
       h.    CITY || 'burg'

3.17   It is sometimes suggested that types are really variables, in a sense. For example, employee
       numbers might grow from three digits to four as a business expands, so we might need to
       update “the set of all possible employee numbers.” Discuss.

3.18   A type is a set of values, so (as noted in the introduction to this chapter) we can define an
       empty type to be a type where the set in question is empty. Can you think of any uses for
       such a type?

3.19   A possrep has a set of components, so we might define some type as having an empty
       possrep. What are the implications?

3.20   The Manifesto requires “=” to apply to every type; more specifically, it requires v1 = v2 to
       evaluate to TRUE if and only if v1 and v2 are the very same value. SQL, by contrast, does
       not require “=” to apply to every type, nor does it prescribe the semantics in all cases where
       it does apply. What are the implications of this state of affairs?

3.21   (For discussion) As noted in the body of the chapter, there are those who would claim that
       XML technology is destined to replace relational technology. There is an XML data model
       (actually several different ones, of which the most important is probably the semistructured
       data model); there is an XML data definition language (actually at least two of them); there
       is an XML query language (at least three of them); and there are XML databases and XML
       DBMSs. What do you think is the true nature—the true technical nature, that is—of the
       relationship between these developments and relational technology? Note: A tutorial on
       XML from a database perspective can be found in Chapter 27 of reference [76].




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 80
                                          Part II:

                        FORMAL SPECIFICATIONS

This part of the book is provided mainly for reference; you probably should not even attempt to
read it straight through—not on a first reading, anyway. Chapter 4 is The Third Manifesto itself
(the “no frills” version); it consists of the various prescriptions, proscriptions, and very strong
suggestions that together constitute the Manifesto proper, with almost no explanatory material at all.
To put it another way, Chapter 4 lays down a set of rules that the language D must abide by. (We
remind you that the name D refers generically to any language that conforms to the principles of the
Manifesto; in principle, any number of distinct languages could qualify as a valid D.) Chapter 5
then defines the language we call Tutorial D—i.e., a D defined primarily to serve as a basis for
examples elsewhere in the book.
      We stress the point that apart from (a) the references in OO Prescription 2 and OO Very
Strong Suggestion 1 in Chapter 4 and (b) a few remarks in passing in Chapter 5, everything to do
with type inheritance is ignored in these two chapters. The material of Part IV extends, but does not
invalidate, the material presented in this part of the book.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen             page II.81