                                           Chapter 4

                              The Third Manifesto

      This is no longer the definitive version of the Manifesto, as several minor revisions
      have been made since this book was published. Some of these revisions appeared
      in Chapter 1 of Database Explorations (2010) but the reader should refer to the
      online document at www.thethirdmanifesto.com for the definitive version. Text
      which has been revised is marked here in blue.


RM PRESCRIPTIONS

 1.   A scalar data type (scalar type for short) is a named, finite set of scalar values (scalars for
      short). Given an arbitrary pair of distinct scalar types named T1 and T2, respectively, with
      corresponding sets of scalar values S1 and S2, respectively, the names T1 and T2 shall be
      distinct and the sets S1 and S2 shall be disjoint; in other words, two scalar types shall be
      equal—i.e., the same type—if and only if they have the same name (and therefore the same
      set of values). D shall provide facilities for users to define their own scalar types (user-
      defined scalar types); other scalar types shall be provided by the system (built-in or system-
      defined scalar types). D shall also provide facilities for users to destroy user-defined scalar
      types. The system-defined scalar types shall include type boolean (containing just two
      values, here denoted TRUE and FALSE), and D shall support all four monadic and 16
      dyadic logical operators, directly or indirectly, for this type.

 2.   All scalar values shall be typed—i.e., such values shall always carry with them, at least
      conceptually, some identification of the type to which they belong.

 3.   A scalar operator is an operator that, when invoked, returns a scalar value (the result of
      that invocation). D shall provide facilities for users to define and destroy their own scalar
      operators (user-defined scalar operators). Other scalar operators shall be provided by the
      system (built-in or system-defined scalar operators). Let Op be a scalar operator. Then:

      a.       Op shall be read-only, in the sense that invoking it shall cause no variables to be
               updated other than ones that are purely local to Op.

      b.       Every invocation of Op shall denote a value (“produce a result”) of the same type,
               the result type—also called the declared type—of Op. The definition of Op shall
               include a specification of the declared type of Op. That type shall be nonempty.

      c.       The definition of Op shall include a specification of the type of each parameter to
               Op, the declared type of that parameter. That type shall be nonempty. If
               parameter P is of declared type T, then, in every invocation of Op, the argument A




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   page 82
Part II / Formal Specifications                                        Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


                that corresponds to P in that invocation shall also be of type T, and that argument A
                shall be effectively assigned to P. Note: The prescriptions of this paragraph c.
                shall also apply if Op is an update operator instead of a read-only operator (see
                below).

       It is convenient to deal with update operators here as well, despite the fact that such
       operators are not scalar (nor are they nonscalar—in fact, they are not typed at all). An
       update operator is an operator that, when invoked, is allowed to update at least one
       variable that is not purely local to that operator. Let V be such a variable. If the operator
       accesses V via some parameter P, then that parameter P is subject to update. D shall
       provide facilities for users to define and destroy their own update operators (user-defined
       update operators). Other update operators shall be provided by the system (built-in or
       system-defined update operators). Let Op be an update operator. Then:

       d.       No invocation of Op shall denote a value (“produce a result”).

       e.       The definition of Op shall include a specification of which parameters to Op are
                subject to update. If parameter P is subject to update, then, in every invocation of
                Op, the argument A that corresponds to P in that invocation shall be a variable
                specifically, and, on completion of the execution of Op caused by that invocation,
                the final value assigned to P during that execution shall be effectively assigned to
                A.

 4.    Let T be a nonempty scalar type, and let v be an appearance in some context of some value
       of type T. By definition, v has exactly one physical representation and one or more
       possible representations (at least one, because there is obviously always one that is the
       same as the physical representation). Physical representations for values of type T shall be
       specified by means of some kind of storage structure definition language and shall not be
       visible in D. As for possible representations:

       a.      If T is user defined, then at least one possible representation for values of type T shall
               be declared and thus made visible in D. For each possible representation PR for
               values of type T that is visible in D, a selector operator S, of declared type T, shall be
               provided with the following properties:

               1.     There shall be a one-to-one correspondence between the parameters of S and
                      the components of PR (see RM Prescription 5). For definiteness, assume the
                      parameters of S and the components of PR each constitute an ordered list of n
                      elements (n  0), such that the ith element in the list of parameters
                      corresponds to the ith element in the list of components; then the declared
                      types of the ith elements in the two lists shall be the same (i = 1, 2, ..., n).

               2.     Every value of type T shall be produced by some invocation of S in which
                      every argument is a literal.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 83
Part II / Formal Specifications                                           Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


               3.      Every successful invocation of S shall produce some value of type T.

       b.      If T is system defined, then zero or more possible representations for values of type T
               shall be declared and thus made visible in D. A possible representation PR for
               values of type T that is visible in D shall behave in all respects as if T were user
               defined and PR were a declared possible representation for values of type T. If no
               possible representation for values of type T is visible in D, then at least one selector
               operator S, of declared type T, shall be provided with the following properties:

               1.      Every argument to every invocation of S shall be a literal.

               2.      Every value of type T shall be produced by some invocation of S.

               3.      Every successful invocation of S shall produce some value of type T.

 5.    Let some declared possible representation PR for values of scalar type T be defined in terms
       of components C1, C2, ..., Cn (n  0), each of which has a name and a declared type. Let v
       be a value of type T, and let PR(v) denote the possible representation corresponding to PR
       for that value v. Then PR(v) shall be exposed—i.e., a set of read-only and update operators
       shall be provided such that:
       a.      For all such values v and for all i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), it shall be possible to “retrieve”
               (i.e., read the value of) the Ci component of PR(v). The read-only operator that
               provides this functionality shall have declared type the same as that of Ci.

       b.      For all variables V of declared type T and for all i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), it shall be possible
               to update V in such a way that if the values of V before and after the update are v and
               v’ respectively, then the possible representations corresponding to PR for v and v’
               (i.e., PR(v) and PR(v’), respectively) differ in their Ci components.

       Such a set of operators shall be provided for each possible representation declared for values
       of type T.

 6.    D shall support the TUPLE type generator. That is, given some heading H (see RM
       Prescription 9), D shall support use of the generated type TUPLE H as a basis for defining
       (or, in the case of values, selecting):

       a.      Values of that type (see RM Prescription 9)

       b.      Variables of that type (see RM Prescription 12)

       c.      Attributes of that type (see RM Prescriptions 9 and 10)

       d.      Components of that type within declared possible representations (see RM
               Prescription




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           page 84
Part II / Formal Specifications                                      Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


       e.      Read-only operators of that type (see RM Prescription 20)

       f.      Parameters of that type to user-defined operators (see RM Prescriptions 3 and 20)

       The generated type TUPLE H shall be referred to as a tuple type, and the name of that type
       shall be, precisely, TUPLE H. The terminology of degree, attributes, and heading
       introduced in RM Prescription 9 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to that type, as well as to
       values and variables of that type (see RM Prescription 12). Tuple types TUPLE H1 and
       TUPLE H2 shall be equal if and only if H1 = H2. The applicable operators shall include
       operators analogous to the RENAME, project, EXTEND, and JOIN operators of the
       relational algebra (see RM Prescription 18), together with tuple assignment (see RM
       Prescription 21) and tuple comparisons (see RM Prescription 22); they shall also include (a)
       a tuple selector operator (see RM Prescription 9), (b) an operator for extracting a specified
       attribute value from a specified tuple (the tuple in question might be required to be of degree
       one—see RM Prescription 9), and (c) operators for performing tuple “nesting” and
       “unnesting.” [Explanatory note added later]

 7.    D shall support the RELATION type generator. That is, given some heading H (see RM
       Prescription 9), D shall support use of the generated type RELATION H as the basis for
       defining (or, in the case of values, selecting):

       a.      Values of that type (see RM Prescription 10)

       b.      Variables of that type (see RM Prescription 13)

       c.      Attributes of that type (see RM Prescriptions 9 and 10)

       d.      Components of that type within declared possible representations (see RM
               Prescription 5)

       e.      Read-only operators of that type (see RM Prescription 20)

       f.      Parameters of that type to user-defined operators (see RM Prescriptions 3 and 20)

       The generated type RELATION H shall be referred to as a relation type, and the name of
       that type shall be, precisely, RELATION H. The terminology of degree, attributes, and
       heading introduced in RM Prescription 9 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to that type, as well
       as to values and variables of that type (see RM Prescription 13). Relation types RELATION
       H1 and RELATION H2 shall be equal if and only if H1 = H2. The applicable operators
       shall include the usual operators of the relational algebra (see RM Prescription 18), together
       with relational assignment (see RM Prescription 21) and relational comparisons (see RM
       Prescription 22); they shall also include (a) a relation selector operator (see RM Prescription
       10), (b) an operator for extracting the sole tuple from a specified relation of cardinality one
       (see RM Prescription 10), and (c) operators for performing relational “nesting” and
       “unnesting.” [Explanatory note added later]




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 85
Part II / Formal Specifications                                      Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


 8.    D shall support the equality comparison operator “=” for every type T. Let Op be an
       operator with a parameter P, let P be such that the argument corresponding to P in some
       invocation of Op is allowed to be of type T, and let v1 and v2 be values of type T. Then
       v1 = v2 shall evaluate to TRUE if and only if, for all such operators Op, two successful
       invocations of Op that are identical in all respects except that the argument corresponding to
       P is v1 in one invocation and v2 in the other are indistinguishable in their effect.

 9.    A heading H is a set of ordered pairs or attributes of the form <A,T>, where:

       a.      A is the name of an attribute of H. No two distinct pairs in H shall have the same
               attribute name.

       b.      T is the name of the declared type of attribute A of H.

       The number of pairs in H—equivalently, the number of attributes of H—is the degree of H.
            Now let t be a set of ordered triples <A,T,v>, obtained from H by extending each
       ordered pair <A,T> to include an arbitrary value v of type T, called the attribute value for
       attribute A of t. Then t is a tuple value (tuple for short) that conforms to heading H;
       equivalently, t is of the corresponding tuple type (see RM Prescription 6). The degree of
       that heading H shall be the degree of t, and the attributes and corresponding types of that
       heading H shall be the attributes and corresponding declared attribute types of t. Given a
       heading H, a selector operator, of type TUPLE H, shall be available for selecting an
       arbitrary tuple conforming to H; every such tuple shall be produced by some invocation of
       that selector in which every argument is a literal, and every successful invocation of that
       selector shall produce some such tuple.

10.    A relation value r (relation for short) consists of a heading and a body, where:

       a.      The heading of r shall be a heading H as defined in RM Prescription 9; r conforms
               to that heading (equivalently, r is of the corresponding relation type—see RM
               Prescription 7). The degree of that heading H shall be the degree of r, and the
               attributes and corresponding types of that heading H shall be the attributes and
               corresponding declared attribute types of r.

       b.      The body of r shall be a set B of tuples, all having that same heading H. The
               cardinality of that body shall be the cardinality of r.

       Given a heading H, a selector operator, of type RELATION H, shall be available for
       selecting an arbitrary relation conforming to H; every such relation shall be produced by
       some invocation of that selector in which every argument is a literal, and every successful
       invocation of that selector shall produce some such relation. [More text later added here]

11.    D shall provide facilities for users to define scalar variables. Each scalar variable shall be
       named and shall have a specified nonempty (scalar) declared type. Let scalar variable V be
       of declared type T; for so long as variable V exists, it shall have a value that is of type T.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 86
Part II / Formal Specifications                                         Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


       Defining V shall have the effect of initializing V to some value—either a value specified
       explicitly as part of the operation that defines V, or some implementation-defined value if no
       such explicit value is specified. [Explanatory note added later]

12.    D shall provide facilities for users to define tuple variables. Each tuple variable shall be
       named and shall have a specified nonempty declared type of the form TUPLE H for some
       heading H. Let variable V be of declared type TUPLE H; then the degree of that heading H
       shall be the degree of V, and the attributes and corresponding types of that heading H shall
       be the attributes and corresponding declared attribute types of V. For so long as variable
       V exists, it shall have a value that is of type TUPLE H. Defining V shall have the effect of
       initializing V to some value—either a value specified explicitly as part of the operation that
       defines V, or some implementation-defined value if no such explicit value is specified.

13.    D shall provide facilities for users to define relation variables (relvars for short)—both
       database relvars (i.e., relvars that are part of some database) and application relvars (i.e.,
       relvars that are local to some application). D shall also provide facilities for users to destroy
       database relvars. Each relvar shall be named and shall have a specified declared type of the
       form RELATION H for some heading H. Let variable V be of declared type RELATION H;
       then the degree of that heading H shall be the degree of V, and the attributes and
       corresponding types of that heading H shall be the attributes and corresponding declared
       attribute types of V. For so long as variable V exists, it shall have a value that is of type
       RELATION H.

14.    Database relvars shall be either real or virtual. A virtual relvar V shall be a database relvar
       whose value at any given time is the result of evaluating a certain relational expression at
       that time; the relational expression in question shall be specified when V is defined and shall
       mention at least one database relvar. A real relvar shall be a database relvar that is not
       virtual. Defining a real relvar V shall have the effect of initializing V to some value──either
       a value specified explicitly as part of the operation that defines V, or an empty relation if no
       such explicit value is specified.
            Application relvars shall be either public or private. A public relvar shall be an
       application relvar that constitutes the perception of the application in question of some
       portion of some database. A private relvar shall be an application relvar that is completely
       private to the application in question and is not part of any database. Defining a private
       relvar V shall have the effect of initializing V to some value—either a value specified
       explicitly as part of the operation that defines V, or an empty relation if no such explicit
       value is specified.

15.    By definition, every relvar shall have at least one candidate key. At least one such key
       shall be defined, either explicitly or implicitly, at the time the relvar in question is defined,
       and it shall not be possible to destroy all of the candidate keys of a given relvar (other than
       by destroying the relvar itself).

16.    A database shall be a named container for relvars; the content of a given database at any
       given time shall be a set of database relvars. The necessary operators for defining and




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       page 87
Part II / Formal Specifications                                        Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


       destroying databases shall not be part of D (in other words, defining and destroying
       databases shall be done “outside the D environment”).

17.    Each transaction shall interact with exactly one database. However, distinct transactions
       shall be able to interact with distinct databases, and distinct databases shall not necessarily
       be disjoint. Also, D shall provide facilities for a transaction to define new relvars, or destroy
       existing ones, within its associated database (see RM Prescription 13). [More text later
       added here]

18.    D shall support the usual operators of the relational algebra (or some logical equivalent
       thereof). Specifically, it shall support, directly or indirectly, at least the operators
       RENAME, restrict (WHERE), project, JOIN, UNION, INTERSECT, MINUS, DIVIDEBY,
       EXTEND, SUMMARIZE, GROUP, and UNGROUP. All such operators shall be
       expressible without excessive circumlocution. D shall support type inference for relation
       types, whereby the type of the result of evaluating an arbitrary relational expression shall be
       well defined and known to both the system and the user. [Explanatory note added later]

19.    Relvar names and relation selector invocations shall both be valid relational expressions.
       Recursion shall be permitted in relational expressions.

20.    D shall provide facilities for users to define and destroy their own tuple operators (user-
       defined tuple operators) and relational operators (user-defined relational operators).
       Paragraphs a.-c. from RM Prescription 3 shall apply, mutatis mutandis. [More text later
       added here]

21.    D shall support the assignment operator “:=” for every type T. The assignment shall be
       referred to as a scalar, tuple, or relation (or relational) assignment according as T is a scalar,
       tuple, or relation type. Let V and v be a variable and a value, respectively, of the same type.
       After assignment of v to V, the equality comparison V = v shall evaluate to TRUE (see RM
       Prescription 8). Furthermore, all variables other than V shall remain unchanged, apart
       possibly from variables defined in terms of V or variables in terms of which V is defined or
       both.
            D shall also support a multiple form of assignment, in which several individual
       assignments shall be performed as a single operation. Let MA be the multiple assignment
       A1 , A2 , ... , An ;

       (where A1, A2, ..., An are individual assignments, each assigning to exactly one target
       variable, and the semicolon marks the overall end of the operation). Then the semantics of
       MA shall be defined by the following pseudocode (Steps a.-d.):

       a.      For i := 1 to n, expand any syntactic shorthands involved in Ai. After all such
               expansions, let MA take the form
               V1 := X1 , V2 := X2 , ... , Vz := Xz ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       page 88
Part II / Formal Specifications                                       Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


               for some z  n, where Vi is the name of some variable not defined in terms of any
               others and Xi is an expression of declared type the same as that of Vi.

       b.      Let p and q (1  p < q  z) be such that Vp and Vq are identical and there is no r (r <
               p or p < r < q) such that Vp and Vr are identical. Replace Aq in MA by an
               assignment of the form
               Vq := WITH Xp AS Vq : Xq

               and remove Ap from MA. Repeat this process until no such pair p and q remains.
               Let MA now consist of the sequence
               U1 := Y1 , U2 := Y2 , ... , Um := Ym ;

               where each Ui is some Vj (1  i  j  m  z).

       c.      For i := 1 to m, evaluate Yi. Let the result be yi.

       d.      For i := 1 to m, assign yi to Ui.

       Note: Step b. of the foregoing pseudocode makes use of the WITH construct of Tutorial D.
       For further explanation, see Chapter 5.

22.    D shall support certain comparison operators, as follows:

       a.      The operators for comparing scalars shall include “=”, “≠”, and (for ordinal types)
               “<”, “>”, etc.

       b.      The operators for comparing tuples shall include “=” and “≠” and shall not include
               “<”, “>”, etc.

       c.      The operators for comparing relations shall include “=”, “≠”, “” (“is a subset of”),
               and “” (“is a superset of”) and shall not include “<”, “>”, etc.

       d.      The operator “” for testing membership of a tuple in a relation shall be supported.

       In every case mentioned except “” the comparands shall be of the same type; in the case of
       “” they shall have the same heading. Note: Support for “=” for every type is in fact
       required by RM Prescription 8.

23.    D shall provide facilities for defining and destroying integrity constraints (constraints for
       short). Let C be a constraint; C can be thought of as a boolean expression (though it might
       not be explicitly formulated as such), and it shall be satisfied if and only if that boolean
       expression evaluates to TRUE [more text later added here]. No user shall ever see a state of
       affairs in which C is not satisfied. There shall be two kinds of constraints:

       a.      A type constraint shall specify the set of values that constitute a given type.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 89
Part II / Formal Specifications                                        Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


       b.      A database constraint shall specify that values of a given set of database relvars
               taken in combination shall be such that a given boolean expression (which shall
               mention no variables other than the database relvars in question) evaluates to TRUE.
               Insofar as feasible, D shall support constraint inference for database constraints,
               whereby the constraints that apply to the result of evaluating an arbitrary relational
               expression shall be well defined and known to both the system and the user.
       [Explanatory note added later]

24.    Let DB be a database; let DBC1, DBC2, ..., DBCn be all of the database constraints defined
       for DB (see RM Prescription 23); and let DBC be any boolean expression that is logically
       equivalent to
       ( DBC1 ) AND ( DBC2 ) AND ... AND ( DBCn ) AND TRUE

       Then DBC is the total database constraint for DB.

25.    Every database shall include a set of database relvars that constitute the catalog for that
       database. D shall provide facilities for assigning to relvars in the catalog. [Explanatory note
       added later]

26.    D shall be constructed according to well-established principles of good language design.


RM PROSCRIPTIONS

 1.    D shall include no concept of a “relation” whose attributes are distinguishable by ordinal
       position. Instead, for every relation r expressible in D, the attributes of r shall be
       distinguishable by name.

 2.    D shall include no concept of a “relation” whose tuples are distinguishable by ordinal
       position. Instead, for every relation r expressible in D, the tuples of r shall be
       distinguishable by value.

 3.    D shall include no concept of a “relation” containing two distinct tuples t1 and t2 such that
       the comparison “t1 = t2” evaluates to TRUE. It follows that (as already stated in RM
       Proscription 2), for every relation r expressible in D, the tuples of r shall be distinguishable
       by value.

 4.    D shall include no concept of a “relation” in which some “tuple” includes some “attribute”
       that does not have a value.

 5.    D shall not forget that relations with no attributes are respectable and interesting, nor that
       candidate keys with no components are likewise respectable and interesting.

 6.    D shall include no constructs that relate to, or are logically affected by, the “physical” or
       “storage” or “internal” levels of the system.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 90
Part II / Formal Specifications                                       Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


 7.    D shall support no tuple-at-a-time operations on relvars or relations.

 8.    D shall not include any specific support for “composite” or “compound” attributes, since
       such functionality can more cleanly be achieved, if desired, through the type support already
       prescribed.

 9.    D shall include no “domain check override” operators, since such operators are both ad hoc
       and unnecessary.

10.    D shall not be called SQL.


OO PRESCRIPTIONS

 1.    D shall permit compile-time type checking.

 2.    If D supports type inheritance, then such support shall conform to the inheritance model
       defined in Part IV of this book. [More text later added here]

 3.    D shall be computationally complete. That is, D may support, but shall not require,
       invocation from so-called host programs written in languages other than D. Similarly, D
       may support, but shall not require, the use of other languages for implementation of user-
       defined operators.

 4.    Transaction initiation shall be performed only by means of an explicit “begin transaction”
       operator. Transaction termination shall be performed only by means of a “commit” or
       “rollback” operator; commit must always be explicit, but rollback can be implicit (if and
       only if the transaction fails through no fault of its own). If transaction TX terminates with
       commit (“normal termination”), changes made by TX to the applicable database shall be
       committed. If transaction TX terminates with rollback (“abnormal termination”), changes
       made by TX to the applicable database shall be rolled back.

 5.    D shall support nested transactions—i.e., it shall permit a parent transaction TX to initiate a
       child transaction TX’ before TX itself has terminated, in which case:

       a.      TX and TX’ shall interact with the same database (as is in fact required by RM
               Prescription 17).

       b.      Whether TX shall be required to suspend execution while TX’ executes shall be
               implementation defined. However, TX shall not be allowed to terminate before TX’
               terminates; in other words, TX’ shall be wholly contained within TX.

       c.      Rollback of TX shall include the rolling back of TX’ even if TX’ has terminated with
               commit. In other words, “commit” is always interpreted within the parent context (if
               such exists) and is subject to override by the parent transaction (again, if such exists)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 91
Part II / Formal Specifications                                         Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


 6.    Let AggOp be an aggregate operator, such as SUM. If the argument to AggOp happens to
       be empty, then:

       a.      If AggOp is essentially just shorthand for some iterated scalar dyadic operator Op
               (the dyadic operator is “+” in the case of SUM), and if an identity value exists for Op
               (the identity value is 0 in the case of “+”), then the result of that invocation of AggOp
               shall be that identity value.

       b.      Otherwise, the result of that invocation of AggOp shall be undefined.


OO PROSCRIPTIONS

 1.    Relvars are not domains.

 2.    No database relvar shall include an attribute of type pointer.


RM VERY STRONG SUGGESTIONS

 1.    D should provide a mechanism according to which values of some specified candidate key
       (or certain components thereof) for some specified relvar are supplied by the system. It
       should also provide a mechanism according to which an arbitrary relation can be extended to
       include an attribute whose values (a) are unique within that relation (or within certain
       partitions of that relation), and (b) are once again supplied by the system.

 2.    D should include some declarative shorthand for expressing referential constraints (also
       known as foreign key constraints). [This VSS was later deleted].

 3.    Let RX be a relational expression. By definition, RX can be thought of as designating a
       relvar, R say—either a user-defined relvar (if RX is just a relvar name) or a system-defined
       relvar (otherwise). It is desirable, though not always entirely feasible, for the system to be
       able to infer the candidate keys of R, such that (among other things):

       a.      If RX constitutes the defining expression for some virtual relvar R’, then those
               inferred candidate keys can be checked for consistency with the candidate keys
               explicitly defined for R’ and—assuming no conflict—become candidate keys for R’.

       b.      Those inferred candidate keys can be included in the information about R that is
               made available (in response to a “metaquery”) to a user of D.

       D should provide such functionality, but without any guarantee (a) that such inferred
       candidate keys are not proper supersets of actual candidate keys, or (b) that such an inferred
       candidate key is discovered for every actual candidate key.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 92
Part II / Formal Specifications                                      Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


 4.    D should support transition constraints──i.e., constraints on the transitions that a given
       database can make from one value to another.

 5.    D should provide some shorthand for expressing quota queries. It should not be necessary
       to convert the relation concerned into (e.g.) an array in order to formulate such a query.

 6.    D should provide some shorthand for expressing the generalized transitive closure
       operation, including the ability to specify generalized concatenate and aggregate operations.

 7.    D should provide some means for users to define their own generic operators, including in
       particular generic relational operators.

 8.    SQL should be implementable in D—not because such implementation is desirable in itself,
       but so that a painless migration route might be available for current SQL users. To this
       same end, existing SQL databases should be convertible to a form that D programs can
       operate on without error.


OO VERY STRONG SUGGESTIONS

 1.    Some level of type inheritance should be supported (in which case, see OO Prescription 2)

 2.    Operator definitions should be logically distinct from the definitions of the types of their
       parameters and results, not “bundled in” with those latter definitions (though the operators
       required by RM Prescriptions 4, 5, 8, and 21 might be exceptions in this regard).

 3.    D should support the concept of single-level storage.


RECENT MANIFESTO CHANGES

There are a number of differences between the Manifesto as defined in the present chapter and the
version documented in this book’s predecessor (reference [83]). For the benefit of readers who
might be familiar with that earlier version, we summarize the main differences here.

 ■    RM Prescription 1 has been simplified and corrected. In particular, (a) the requirement that
      values and variables of type T be operable upon solely by means of operators defined for type
      T has been deleted, since it was tautologous; (b) the references to RM Prescriptions 4 and 5
      have been deleted, since they were redundant.

 ■    Type truth value has been renamed type boolean, and the truth values true and false have
      been renamed TRUE and FALSE, respectively.

 ■    RM Prescription 3 has been restructured to make it clear that scalar operators are read-only by
      definition, while update operators have no type at all but can update variables (arguments in
      particular) of any type. Paragraph a. outlaws side effects on the part of read-only operators.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   page 93
Part II / Formal Specifications                                        Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


      Paragraph b. requires result types to be nonempty. Paragraph c. requires parameter types to
      be nonempty. Paragraph e. explains the semantics of parameters that are subject to update in
      terms of effective assignment instead of (as previously) in terms of passing by reference vs.
      passing by value.

 ■    RM Prescription 4 now refers explicitly to nonempty types. It allows empty possreps. Also,
      “actual” representations are now called physical representations, and the requirement that
      declared possreps be defined as part of the pertinent type definition (instead of, possibly,
      elsewhere) has been deleted.

 ■    Several omissions to do with selectors have been rectified: Result types (and in fact the
      complete semantics) of tuple and relation selectors are specified; scalar selector parameters
      are explained; and possreps and selectors for system-defined scalar types are specified. Also,
      result types are specified for the read-only operators that access possrep components.

 ■    The phrase “at most only” has been deleted from paragraph b. of RM Prescription 5. (As it
      stood, that phrase rendered the paragraph vacuous, while deleting “at most” but keeping
      “only” would result in a prescription that could be awkward to satisfy.)

 ■    RM Prescriptions 6 and 7 have been extended to include tuple and relation types as possible
      declared types for parameters and read-only operators.

 ■    RM Prescription 9 now defines tuples in terms of tuple types instead of vice versa.

 ■    The fact that (except for relvars) variables must have a nonempty declared type is now stated
      explicitly, as is the fact that they always have a value (there is no such thing as an unitialized
      variable). Real relvars can now be explicitly initialized.

 ■    RM Prescription 14 has been expanded to include details of application relvars.

 ■    Candidate key specifications can now be implicit (for virtual relvars in particular; previously
      we required them always to be explicit, but that was just an oversight).

 ■    RM Prescription 18 now mentions GROUP and UNGROUP.

 ■    RM Prescription 20 has been generalized.

 ■    RM Prescription 21 has been clarified (and, in the case of multiple assignment, corrected).

 ■    RM Prescription 23 now explicitly spells out the semantics of type and database constraints
      (attribute and relvar constraints as such are no longer mentioned).

 ■    RM Prescription 24 has been revised and simplified.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       page 94
Part II / Formal Specifications                                        Chapter 4 / The Third Manifesto


 ■    RM Very Strong Suggestion 8 has been deleted (and RM Very Strong Suggestion 9 has been
      renumbered accordingly); very strongly suggesting the “special values” approach to missing
      information is (we now feel) to promote that approach more than it merits.

 ■    OO Very Strong Suggestion 1 has been abbreviated.

 ■    OO Very Strong Suggestions 3 and 4 have been deleted (and OO Very Strong Suggestion 5
      has been renumbered accordingly); we no longer believe there are any strong arguments in
      favor of supporting additional “collection” type generators, over and above RELATION.

In addition to all of the foregoing, almost all of the prescriptions, proscriptions, and very strong
suggestions have been reworded (in some cases extensively). However, those revisions in
themselves are not intended to induce any changes in what is being described.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 95