                                                       Chapter 6

                                          RM Prescriptions

RM PRESCRIPTION 1: SCALAR TYPES

A scalar data type (scalar type for short) is a named, finite set of scalar values (scalars for short).
Given an arbitrary pair of distinct scalar types named T1 and T2, respectively, with corresponding
sets of scalar values S1 and S2, respectively, the names T1 and T2 shall be distinct and the sets S1
and S2 shall be disjoint; in other words, two scalar types shall be equal—i.e., the same type—if and
only if they have the same name (and therefore the same set of values). D shall provide facilities for
users to define their own scalar types (user-defined scalar types); other scalar types shall be
provided by the system (built-in or system-defined scalar types). D shall also provide facilities for
users to destroy user-defined scalar types. The system-defined scalar types shall include type
boolean (containing just two values, here denoted TRUE and FALSE), and D shall support all four
monadic and 16 dyadic logical operators, directly or indirectly, for this type.

                                              ———  ———

We begin by reminding you from Chapter 3 that the terms domain and class—short for object
class—are sometimes used as synonyms for type (in relational and object contexts, respectively),
and we occasionally use these latter terms ourselves if the context demands. However, we prefer
type. We remind you too that, in general, we take the unqualified term type to refer to types of all
kinds: scalar or otherwise, built in or otherwise, generated or otherwise. In this section, however,
we focus on scalar types in particular, and the term type should thus be taken to refer to such a type
specifically, barring explicit statements to the contrary.
      We refer generically to values of some scalar type as scalar values (scalars for short, or just
values if there is no risk of ambiguity). Likewise, we refer generically to variables whose values are
constrained to be scalars as scalar variables (or just variables if there is no risk of ambiguity).
Note, however, that the physical representation of such scalar values and variables can be arbitrarily
complex. For example, a given scalar value might have a physical representation consisting of an
array of stacks of lists of character strings. But, of course, such physical representations are always
hidden from the user; they are part of the implementation, not part of the model. (Do not be misled
by the fact that scalar types usually1 have “possible” representations—possreps for short—that,
unlike physical representations, are definitely not hidden from the user. In other words, if type T
has a possrep PR and PR has a component C, then C is visible to the user. However, C is,
specifically, a component of PR, not a component of T as such. See RM Prescription 4 for further
elaboration.)



1
  The exceptions are dummy types and empty types. Dummy types are part of our inheritance model and are ignored in
this chapter. As for empty types, they are of little significance unless inheritance is supported, but it is necessary to say
something about them in this chapter nevertheless.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        page 133
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                          Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      Scalar types can be user or system defined (i.e., built in). We require that at least one built-in
scalar type be supported: namely, type boolean (BOOLEAN in Tutorial D).1 Following reference
[77], we justify this requirement as follows:

    ■   If we can write an expression X that evaluates to a value v of type T, we must surely also be
        able to declare a variable V of that same type T—for otherwise the system would violate
        several well-known principles of language design (see RM Prescription 26). In other words,
        T must be a type that is “known to the system,” and every expression must evaluate to a value
        that is of some type that is known to the system.

    ■   One kind of expression we definitely need to be able to write is an expression of the form v1
        = v2 (i.e., an expression that tests two values for equality—see RM Prescription 8). And, of
        course, such expressions return a value of type BOOLEAN. It follows that BOOLEAN needs
        to be a type that is known to the system.

      Now we turn to user-defined scalar types. Here are some examples. First we consider the
suppliers-and-parts database from Chapter 2 (and again we assume that attributes STATUS and
CITY are of built-in types INTEGER and CHAR, respectively). Here are possible definitions for
the types needed for the remaining attributes:
        TYPE S# ORDINAL POSSREP { C CHAR } ;

        TYPE P# ORDINAL POSSREP { C CHAR } ;

        TYPE NAME ORDINAL POSSREP { N CHAR } ;

        TYPE COLOR POSSREP { C CHAR } ;

        TYPE WEIGHT ORDINAL POSSREP { WT RATIONAL CONSTRAINT WT > 0.0 } ;

        TYPE QTY ORDINAL POSSREP { I INTEGER CONSTRAINT I > 0 } ;

      Examples similar to these were discussed in Chapter 3, and we refer you to that chapter for
the basics. Here we just draw your attention to a few additional points:

    ■   All of these types except COLOR are ordinal types, and we now explicitly show—as we did
        not in Chapter 3—the necessary ORDINAL specification for such types. (Recall that an
        ordinal type is one for which the operator “<“ is supported.)

    ■   Note that, e.g., types S# and P# are different types, even though they have essentially the
        same possrep (in particular, of course, they have different names). Thus, an S# value s and a
        P# value p are different values, even if they can both “possibly be represented” by the same
        character string c.



1
 As we saw in Chapter 5, Tutorial D also supports INTEGER, RATIONAL, and CHARACTER (CHAR for short) as
built-in scalar types.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 134
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                        Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


 ■    Types WEIGHT and QTY both involve an explicit CONSTRAINT specification. Thus,
      whereas the only constraint on (for example) type COLOR is that it must be representable as a
      character string—meaning every possible string apparently corresponds to some valid
      color!—weights and quantities are both constrained to be greater than zero. (More precisely,
      they are constrained to be such that they can be represented by a numeric value that is greater
      than zero. Notice how the CONSTRAINT specifications rely on using possrep component
      names to refer to the corresponding possrep components for an arbitrary value of the type in
      question. For example, the CONSTRAINT specification I > 0 for type QTY means: “Every
      value of type QTY is such that its integer possible representation I is greater than zero.”)

 ■    Type WEIGHT in particular raises the question of units (e.g., pounds vs. grams). We choose
      to ignore this question for now; in effect, we simply assume—partly reasonably and partly
      not—that it makes sense to talk about a given weight without any mention of the
      corresponding units. Analogous remarks apply to several other types that we use as
      examples, both here and in later chapters. The whole question of types vs. units is discussed
      in detail in Appendix C.

      Here are some more examples (note carefully that they are still all examples of scalar types
specifically, even the last one, because they have no user-visible components):
      TYPE LENGTH ORDINAL POSSREP { M RATIONAL CONSTRAINT M  0.0 } ;

      TYPE ANGLE ORDINAL
           POSSREP { RHO RATIONAL CONSTRAINT RHO  0.0 AND RHO < 2 * 3.14159 } ;

      TYPE POINT      /* geometric points in two-dimensional space */
           POSSREP POINT { X RATIONAL, Y RATIONAL }
           POSSREP POLAR { R LENGTH, THETA ANGLE } ;

      TYPE ELLIPSE POSSREP { A LENGTH, B LENGTH, CTR POINT CONSTRAINT A  B } ;

      TYPE POLYGON POSSREP { VERTICES RELATION { V# INTEGER, VERTEX POINT } } ;

      Explanation:

 ■    Type LENGTH is similar to the ones we have already shown in connection with the suppliers-
      and-parts database.

 ■    Type ANGLE is also similar. In this case, the constraint says that angles must be greater than
      or equal to zero and less than 2; we are assuming that angles are measured in radians (2
      radians = 360°), which is why we call the possrep component RHO. Again, however, see
      Appendix C for further discussion of types and units.

 ■    Type POINT is a variation on type POINT as already discussed in Chapter 3; note in
      particular that (a) it is not an ordinal type and (b) it involves two distinct possreps, one
      cartesian and one polar. The definition differs from that given in Chapter 3 in two ways.
      First, the cartesian possrep has been renamed POINT—the same as the type itself—for
      simplicity (and we will adopt this simplification throughout the rest of this book). Second,




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                  page 135
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                           Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      the polar possrep components are now of some user-defined type instead of, as previously, the
      system-defined type RATIONAL—R is of type LENGTH and THETA is of type ANGLE.
      Note: Possible CONSTRAINT specifications for type POINT are discussed later in this
      chapter, under RM Prescriptions 8 and 23.

 ■    Type ELLIPSE (not ordinal) also has a possrep defined in terms of user-defined types;
      components A, B, and CTR of that possrep correspond to the major semiaxis a, the minor
      semiaxis b, and the center ctr, respectively, of the ellipse in question. (We are assuming for
      simplicity that ellipses are always oriented such that their major axis is horizontal and their
      minor axis vertical, so that a, b, and ctr together do indeed constitute a valid possrep. The
      CONSTRAINT specification constrains the major axis a to be greater than or equal to the
      minor semiaxis b—in other words, ellipses are always “short and fat,” not “tall and thin.”)

 ■    Finally, type POLYGON (also not ordinal) differs from the previous examples in that the sole
      component, VERTICES, of its declared possrep (which is named POLYGON by default) is
      relation valued. To be specific, a given polygon might possibly be represented by a relation
      containing one tuple for each vertex of the polygon in question; that tuple would contain a
      vertex number (a value of type INTEGER), together with the corresponding vertex itself (a
      value of type POINT). To repeat, however, polygons are still scalar values, even though they
      have a possrep with a nonscalar component. Note: Possible CONSTRAINT specifications
      for type POLYGON are discussed later in this chapter, under RM Prescription 23.

       We remind you from Chapter 3 that it is possible for a scalar type to be empty (meaning there
are no values of the type in question). As noted in footnote 1 on page 133, the real significance of
this fact will not manifest itself until we get to type inheritance, but it is at least necessary to state
explicitly in the Manifesto from time to time that some type must not be empty. To be specific:

 ■    RM Prescription 3 requires result types for scalar operators to be nonempty and parameter
      types for scalar and update operators to be nonempty.

 ■    RM Prescription 20 requires result types for tuple-valued operators and parameter types for
      tuple- and relation-valued operators to be nonempty.

 ■    RM Prescription 11 requires types of scalar variables to be nonempty.

 ■    RM Prescription 12 requires types of tuple variables to be nonempty.

      Note that there is no such thing as an empty relation type—why not?—and the question of
prohibiting such a type in certain contexts (e.g., as the result type for a relation-valued operator)
thus does not arise.
      Here is an example of destroying a user-defined scalar type:
      DROP TYPE ELLIPSE ;

      Note finally that although we do not prescribe such a thing, we do not mean to preclude the
possibility that D might usefully include some kind of “alter type” operator as a shorthand.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 136
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                        Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


RM PRESCRIPTION 2: SCALAR VALUES ARE TYPED

All scalar values shall be typed—i.e., such values shall always carry with them, at least
conceptually, some identification of the type to which they belong.

                                      ———  ———

This prescription merely insists that there be no such thing as a “typeless” scalar value—every such
value must be a value of some scalar type. As we put it in Chapter 3, if v is a scalar value, then v
can be thought of as carrying around with it a kind of flag that announces “I am an integer” or “I am
a supplier number” or “I am a geometric point” (and so on). Observe that, by definition, any given
value (a) will always be of exactly one type (except possibly if type inheritance is supported), and
(b) can never change its type. Observe also that it follows from the first of these points that—as
required by RM Prescription 1, in fact—distinct types are disjoint, meaning they have no values in
common (again, except possibly if type inheritance is supported).
      Note: All of the foregoing points concerning scalar values apply, mutatis mutandis, to tuple
and relation values also, since tuple and relation values are ultimately made out of scalar values.
See RM Prescriptions 6 and 7.


RM PRESCRIPTION 3: READ-ONLY VS. UPDATE OPERATORS

A scalar operator is an operator that, when invoked, returns a scalar value (the result of that
invocation). D shall provide facilities for users to define and destroy their own scalar operators
(user-defined scalar operators). Other scalar operators shall be provided by the system (built-in or
system-defined scalar operators). Let Op be a scalar operator. Then:

 a.   Op shall be read-only, in the sense that invoking it shall cause no variables to be updated
      other than ones that are purely local to Op.

 b.   Every invocation of Op shall denote a value (“produce a result”) of the same type, the result
      type—also called the declared type—of Op. The definition of Op shall include a specification
      of the declared type of Op. That type shall be nonempty.

 c.   The definition of Op shall include a specification of the type of each parameter to Op, the
      declared type of that parameter. That type shall be nonempty. If parameter P is of declared
      type T, then, in every invocation of Op, the argument A that corresponds to P in that
      invocation shall also be of type T, and that argument A shall be effectively assigned to P.
      Note: The prescriptions of this paragraph c. shall also apply if Op is an update operator
      instead of a read-only operator (see below).

      It is convenient to deal with update operators here as well, despite the fact that such
operators are not scalar (nor are they nonscalar—in fact, they are not typed at all). An update
operator is an operator that, when invoked, is allowed to update at least one variable that is not
purely local to that operator. Let V be such a variable. If the operator accesses V via some
parameter P, then that parameter P is subject to update. D shall provide facilities for users to




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                  page 137
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


define and destroy their own update operators (user-defined update operators). Other update
operators shall be provided by the system (built-in or system-defined update operators). Let Op be
an update operator. Then:

 d.   No invocation of Op shall denote a value (“produce a result”).

 e.   The definition of Op shall include a specification of which parameters to Op are subject to
      update. If parameter P is subject to update, then, in every invocation of Op, the argument A
      that corresponds to P in that invocation shall be a variable specifically, and, on completion of
      the execution of Op caused by that invocation, the final value assigned to P during that
      execution shall be effectively assigned to A.

                                      ———  ———

The discussion that follows is split into three subsections, one for scalar operators, one for update
operators, and one with some observations that apply to both.

Scalar Operators

A scalar operator Op is an operator that returns a scalar value—meaning, more precisely, that any
given invocation of Op denotes some scalar value and can therefore appear wherever a literal
representation of that value could appear. For example, recall the scalar operator ABS (“absolute
value”) from Chapter 3, which returns the absolute value of its integer argument. That operator is
of declared type INTEGER; thus, if N is a variable of declared type INTEGER, then, e.g., the
expression
      ABS ( N - 1 ) * 3

is valid and is also of declared type INTEGER. (We are relying here on the fact that the operators
“-” and “*”, when applied to integer arguments, both return an integer result.)
       Like scalar types, scalar operators can be either user or system defined (built in). Built-in
scalar operators are defined, necessarily, only in connection with built-in types. For the built-in
types supported by Tutorial D (BOOLEAN, INTEGER, RATIONAL, and CHAR), we assume
built-in scalar operators as follows:

 ■    For all four types, the equality operator “=” (required for every type by RM Prescription 8)

 ■    For BOOLEAN, the logical operators NOT, AND, OR, XOR, etc. (required by RM
      Prescription 1)

 ■    For INTEGER, RATIONAL, and CHAR, the comparison operators “<”, “”, etc. (see RM
      Prescription 22)

 ■    For INTEGER and RATIONAL, the arithmetic operators “+”, “*”, etc.

 ■    For CHAR, the string operators “||” (concatenate), SUBSTR (substring), etc.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 138
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


and so on. (Exercise: What are the declared types of these operators?) User-defined operators, by
contrast, can be defined in connection with either built-in types or user-defined ones (or a mixture,
of course). Several examples—ABS, DIST, and others—were given in Chapter 3, and we refer you
to that chapter if you need to refresh your memory regarding the basics; however, we give a few
more examples here in order to make some additional points.
       First, here is the required “=” operator for type LENGTH:
      OPERATOR EQ ( L1 LENGTH, L2 LENGTH ) RETURNS BOOLEAN ;
          RETURN ( THE_M ( L1 ) = THE_M ( L2 ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

(This example is very similar to one we gave in Chapter 3.) Points arising:

 ■    The operator is defined in terms of two parameters, both of declared type LENGTH. When it
      is invoked, therefore, the corresponding arguments must both be of type LENGTH also.

 ■    The operator is of declared type BOOLEAN. Observe that it is precisely because its declared
      type is scalar that we regard the operator as scalar also. Observe too that parameters and
      arguments to a scalar operator do not necessarily have to be scalar themselves, though they
      are in the case at hand.

 ■    The expression in the RETURN statement makes use of THE_ operators to access possrep
      components of its arguments (see RM Prescription 5). It also makes use of the built-in
      operator “=” for type RATIONAL. In fact, we will assume from this point forward that the
      equality operator for every type uses the familiar “=” notation; we omit consideration of how
      that notation might be specified, since (as noted in Chapter 3) it is basically just a matter of
      syntax.

 ■    As also noted in Chapter 3, it should never be necessary in practice to spell out the definition
      of “=” for any type at all (despite the foregoing example). Instead, that definition can and
      should be provided by the system when the type in question is defined.

 ■    LENGTH also happens to be an ordinal type, implying that the operators “≠”, “<”, “”, “>”,
      and “” all apply and need to be defined, in one way or another. (Actually, several additional
      operators are also required for ordinal types: first, last, next, prior, and possibly others. We
      omit the details here, referring you to reference [85] for further discussion.)

Now, the foregoing example is perhaps not very good, precisely because in practice we would
expect the “=” definition to be provided by the system, as already noted. Here by contrast is a more
realistic example:
      OPERATOR REFLECT ( P POINT ) RETURNS POINT ;
          BEGIN ;
              VAR Q POINT ;
              Q := POINT ( - THE_X ( P ) , - THE_Y ( P ) ) ;
              RETURN ( Q ) ;
          END ;
      END OPERATOR ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 139
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                        Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      Given a point P, with cartesian coordinates (x,y), this operator returns the “reflected” or
“inverse” point with cartesian coordinates (-x,-y). Note the use of a local variable, Q. Points
arising:

    ■    Like all scalar operators, REFLECT is read-only: It does not update anything apart from the
         purely local variable Q (in fact, an exception should be raised if it tries to do so). We require
         scalar operators to be read-only—equivalently, we require update operators not to return a
         value—in order to prevent side effects.1 For suppose, contrariwise, that we were able to
         define REFLECT in such a way as not only to return the inverse point as before, but also (say)
         to update its argument to set it to that inverse point. Then, e.g., the assignment
         V := REFLECT ( Z ) ;

         would have the side effect of updating the variable Z. We might even imagine a database
         retrieval operation having the side effect of updating the database! Note: Despite all we have
         just said, we often use the qualifier read-only explicitly for emphasis, even though scalar
         operators are read-only by definition.

    ■    Paragraph c. of RM Prescription 3 says that arguments are effectively assigned to parameters.
         In the invocation REFLECT(Z), for example, the value of the argument Z is effectively
         assigned to the parameter P before the operator is executed. But we are defining a model
         here, of course; in practice, the implementation is free to perform the passing of arguments
         any way it chooses, just so long as the effect is logically indistinguishable from that of
         effective assignment.

    ■    Since scalar operators have a declared type (meaning every invocation of the operator in
         question denotes a value of that type), it follows that scalar expressions in general have a
         declared type. To be specific, let X be such an expression. By definition, X specifies an
         invocation of some scalar operator Op (where the arguments, if any, to that invocation of Op
         are specified as expressions in turn). Then the declared type of X is, precisely, the declared
         type of Op. For example, any expression of the form REFLECT(z) has declared type POINT,
         regardless of how complex the expression z happens to be.

    We close this subsection with a couple more examples. First, here is a simpler definition of
REFLECT:
         OPERATOR REFLECT ( P POINT ) RETURNS POINT ;
             RETURN ( POINT ( - THE_X ( P ) , - THE_Y ( P ) ) ) ;
         END OPERATOR ;

This definition is simpler than the previous one in that it avoids the need for the local variable Q and
the concomitant need to use a compound statement (“BEGIN; ... END;” in Tutorial D).
      Second, here is an admittedly rather contrived example of a scalar operator with a nonscalar—
actually relational—parameter:


1
    We require tuple- and relation-valued operators to be read-only as well for the same reason.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                page 140
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                 Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


        OPERATOR CITY_COUNT ( R RELATION { CITY CHAR }, C CHAR ) RETURNS INTEGER ;
            RETURN ( COUNT ( R WHERE CITY  C ) ) ;
        END OPERATOR ;

Two sample invocations:
        CITY_COUNT ( P { CITY }, 'London' )

        CITY_COUNT ( S { CITY }, 'New York' )

Given our usual sample values, these two invocations return 3 and 1, respectively.

Update Operators

An update operator is an operator that updates something other than a purely local variable and does
not return a result. Here by way of example is an update version of REFLECT:
        OPERATOR REFLECT ( P POINT ) UPDATES { P } ;
            BEGIN ;
                P := POINT ( - THE_X ( P ) , - THE_Y ( P ) ) ;
                RETURN ;
            END ;
        END OPERATOR ;

       This operator is defined in terms of a single parameter P, of declared type POINT, and, when
invoked, it updates the argument corresponding to that parameter appropriately. That argument
must be of the same type as that parameter; moreover, it must be a variable specifically, since in the
final analysis it is only variables that can be updated. (Recall from Chapter 5, however, that
Tutorial D allows a pseudovariable to appear wherever a variable is required; in other words,
pseudovariables are variables, loosely speaking.)
       To avoid confusion, let us change the names of the read-only and update versions of
REFLECT to R_REFLECT and U_REFLECT, respectively. Then there are several logical
differences between the two, which we now explain:

    ■   R_REFLECT has a declared type but U_REFLECT does not.

    ■   R_REFLECT returns a result; an R_REFLECT invocation has a value and is an expression
        and can be nested inside other expressions. U_REFLECT, by contrast, does not return a
        result; it has an UPDATES specification instead of a RETURNS specification, and there is no
        result expression in the RETURN statement.1 Hence, a U_REFLECT invocation does not
        have a value and is not an expression and cannot be nested inside other expressions. It
        follows that U_REFLECT must be invoked by means of an explicit CALL statement (or
        something logically equivalent to such a statement)—for example:


1
 In fact, the RETURN statement could be omitted entirely in Tutorial D, in which case an implicit RETURN will be
executed when the END OPERATOR is reached. (In the particular example under discussion, omitting the RETURN
would mean we could omit the BEGIN and END as well—the compound statement would reduce to a single
assignment statement.)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                             page 141
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                        Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


     CALL U_REFLECT ( Z ) ;

 ■   Like scalar operators, update operators can be either user or system defined (built in).
     However, the only built-in update operator—in fact, the only update operator logically
     required—is assignment (“:=”), which is prescribed for every type by RM Prescription 21;
     any update operator is logically equivalent to some sequence of one or more assignments (any
     of them possibly a multiple assignment). For pragmatic reasons, however, we do permit user-
     defined update operators of arbitrary complexity. Note: The assignment operator per se
     (“:=”) resembles the equality operator (“=”) in that it should never be necessary in practice to
     spell out its definition for any type at all. Instead, that definition can and should be provided
     by the system when the type in question is defined.

 ■   We already know that, for an update operator as for a read-only operator, arguments must be
     of the same types as the corresponding parameters, and they are effectively assigned to those
     parameters when the operator is invoked. After the operator has completed execution,
     moreover, those parameters that are subject to update (i.e., those mentioned in the UPDATES
     specification) are effectively assigned back to the corresponding arguments, thereby achieving
     the intended update result. Again, however, we are defining a model here; in practice, the
     implementation is free to achieve the intended update result any way it chooses, just so long
     as the effect is logically indistinguishable from that of effective assignment. In particular, it
     might choose to use pass by reference for the arguments in question, in which case an
     assignment to a parameter that is subject to update will really be an assignment direct to the
     corresponding argument.

     We close this subsection with another example:
     OPERATOR CHANGE_SCITY
              ( R RELATION { S# S#, SNAME NAME, STATUS INTEGER, CITY CHAR },
                X S#, C CHAR ) UPDATES { R } ;
        UPDATE R WHERE S# = X ( CITY := C ) ;
     END OPERATOR ;

Two sample invocations:
     CALL CHANGE_SCITY ( S, S#('S1'), 'Oslo' ) ;

     CALL CHANGE_SCITY ( S, S#('S8'), 'Oslo' ) ;

Given our usual sample values, these two invocations move supplier S1 to Oslo and have no effect,
respectively.

Miscellaneous Issues

Tutorial D allows user-defined operators of all kinds to be destroyed by means of the DROP
OPERATOR statement. For example:
     DROP OPERATOR CHANGE_SCITY ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                  page 142
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                   Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


       Observe now that many of the operators we have been discussing—many of the built-in ones,
at any rate—are overloaded. An operator is overloaded if another operator exists with the same
name. To take the most obvious example, “=” is overloaded; there is an “=” operator that works for
integers, and another that works for character strings, and another that works for supplier numbers,
and in fact one for every type. Other examples include “:=” (which, like “=”, is defined for every
type); “+” (which is defined for both integers and rational numbers, as well as—probably—lengths,
quantities, weights, and so on);1 “<” (which is defined for integers, rational numbers, character
strings, and in fact all ordinal types); and so on. Note: We are assuming here that type inheritance
is not in effect, for otherwise the operators under discussion might be inherited from some common
supertype instead of being overloaded as such. See Part IV of this book for further explanation.
       The Manifesto permits the overloading of user-defined operators as well. That is, the fact that
a user-defined operator Op exists does not preclude the possibility of defining another operator with
the same name Op but a different number of parameters or different parameter declared types (and
hence different, though preferably similar, semantics). Moreover, if two distinct operators do exist
with the same name, those operators might have different result declared types.
       To pursue the point a little further, it might even be possible, not just to overload, but to
override an existing operator—i.e., replace it entirely—by defining another operator with the same
name, same number of parameters, and same parameter and result declared types but different
semantics. For example, it might be possible to override a built-in LOG operator, which returns
natural logarithms, say, by one that returns logarithms to base 10 instead. For obvious reasons, we
recommend that this feature be used with all due caution.
       We conclude this subsection, and this section, with a few remarks on terminology:

    ■   Parameters: Parameters that are subject to update are sometimes called read/write
        parameters, on the grounds that they are both “read” and “written” during execution of the
        pertinent operator. By the same token, parameters that are not subject to update are
        sometimes called read-only parameters. Note: We neither prescribe nor proscribe what
        might be called write-only parameters.

    ■   Operators: In object systems, read-only and update operators are called observers and
        mutators, respectively, and operators in general are called methods. Read-only operators in
        particular are also called functions, both in object systems and elsewhere. We have several
        reasons for not wanting to use this latter term, however. First of all, a function is, strictly
        speaking, a many-to-one mapping from argument values to result values; thus, a read-only
        operator is indeed a function. However, the term function is often used, loosely, as a
        synonym for operator, and thus taken to include update operators in particular. But an update
        operator is not a function, because (a) there is no result value and (b) typically, at least one of
        its arguments must be, very specifically, a variable instead of a value. Moreover, read-only
        operators might not be functions either, if they were allowed to return more than one result
        (see Appendix A) or to be what the SQL standard [99] calls “possibly nondeterministic”


1
  Some languages even use “+” to denote string concatenation. Overloading “+” in this way does not seem very wise,
however, because it has the consequence that the expressions a+b and b+a are not necessarily equivalent (concatenation
is not commutative).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                 page 143
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      (meaning distinct invocations with the same arguments might give different results, a
      possibility we do not allow).

 ■    Overloading: We spoke earlier of “overloaded operators,” and that term is indeed the one
      conventionally used in this context. But it should be clear that it is really operator names that
      are overloaded, not operators as such. In the case of “+”, for example, the situation is that the
      same name “+” is being used to refer to several different operators, and thus it is that name
      “+” that is really being overloaded.

 ■    Polymorphism: In Chapter 3, we said an operator is polymorphic if its arguments can be of
      different types on different invocations, and we gave “=” and “:=” as examples. Now we are
      saying that “=” and “:=” are overloaded, and you might be forgiven for wondering just what
      is going on here: Are these operators overloaded, or are they polymorphic? In fact, they are
      both; overloading is simply one kind of polymorphism (it is sometimes explicitly called “ad
      hoc polymorphism” [15]). Other kinds include inclusion polymorphism, to be discussed in
      Part IV of this book, and generic polymorphism, which is the kind that arises in connection
      with a type generator (it is the kind of polymorphism exhibited by, among other things, the
      operators of the relational algebra).


RM PRESCRIPTION 4: PHYSICAL VS. POSSIBLE REPRESENTATIONS

Let T be a nonempty scalar type, and let v be an appearance in some context of some value of type
T. By definition, v has exactly one physical representation and one or more possible
representations (at least one, because there is obviously always one that is the same as the physical
representation). Physical representations for values of type T shall be specified by means of some
kind of storage structure definition language and shall not be visible in D. As for possible
representations:

 a.   If T is user defined, then at least one possible representation for values of type T shall be
      declared and thus made visible in D. For each possible representation PR for values of type
      T that is visible in D, a selector operator S, of declared type T, shall be provided with the
      following properties:

      1.   There shall be a one-to-one correspondence between the parameters of S and the
           components of PR (see RM Prescription 5). For definiteness, assume the parameters of S
           and the components of PR each constitute an ordered list of n elements (n  0), such that
           the ith element in the list of parameters corresponds to the ith element in the list of
           components; then the declared types of the ith elements in the two lists shall be the same
           (i = 1, 2, ..., n).

      2.   Every value of type T shall be produced by some invocation of S in which every argument
           is a literal.

      3.   Every successful invocation of S shall produce some value of type T.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 144
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                       Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


    b.   If T is system defined, then zero or more possible representations for values of type T shall be
         declared and thus made visible in D. A possible representation PR for values of type T that is
         visible in D shall behave in all respects as if T were user defined and PR were a declared
         possible representation for values of type T. If no possible representation for values of type T
         is visible in D, then at least one selector operator S, of declared type T, shall be provided with
         the following properties:

         1.    Every argument to every invocation of S shall be a literal.

         2.    Every value of type T shall be produced by some invocation of S.

         3.    Every successful invocation of S shall produce some value of type T.

                                               ———  ———

The discussion that follows is split into three subsections, one each for user-defined and system-
defined types and one with a few miscellaneous observations. For simplicity we assume all types
are scalar, barring explicit statements to the contrary; we also assume all types are both user defined
and nonempty, again barring explicit statements to the contrary.

User-Defined Types

It is convenient to begin our discussion by taking a brief look at object systems. Now, it is well
known that such systems had difficulty when they first appeared over ad hoc query and related
matters. The reason was that objects could be accessed only by means of whatever predefined
methods (i.e., operators) had been provided for the class in question; ad hoc query and access via
predefined methods are conflicting concepts, almost by definition.1 For example, suppose objects
of class POINT have an associated GET_X method to “get” (i.e., read) their x coordinate, but no
analogous GET_Y method. Then even simple queries like the following—

    ■    Get the y coordinate of point P

    ■    Given some set S of points, get all points in S that lie on the x axis

    ■    Given some set S of points, get all points in S whose y coordinate lies within some range

(and many others like them)—obviously cannot be handled; in fact, they cannot even be formulated.
      We note, however, that one method that must be provided for every class is what the
Manifesto calls a selector, in order to allow for the “selection” or specification of an arbitrary value
of the class in question. Consider the following code fragment:
         VAR X RATIONAL ;
         VAR Y RATIONAL ;
         VAR P POINT ;


1
    We deliberately use the terminology of objects, methods, and classes throughout this discussion of object systems.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     page 145
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                          Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      X := + 4.0 ;
      Y := - 2.5 ;
      P := POINT ( X, Y ) ;

      Variable P now contains a certain POINT value: namely, the point with cartesian coordinates
(+4.0,-2.5). And as we know from Chapter 3 and elsewhere, the expressions 4.0 and -2.5 are
RATIONAL selector invocations and the expression POINT(X,Y) is a POINT selector invocation.
Observe, therefore, that:

 ■    The parameters to a given selector S together constitute, necessarily, a possible
      representation for objects of the pertinent class C. For example, it is clearly possible for
      points to be represented by means of cartesian coordinates. Given a class C, therefore,
      together with a selector S for that class, we can say there exists a possible representation or
      possrep, PR say, for that class C that corresponds to that selector S.

 ■    If a method analogous to the GET_X method discussed above were to be provided for every
      component of possrep PR, then objects of class C could be accessed for retrieval purposes just
      as if PR were the physical representation and that physical representation were exposed to the
      user. In other words, ad hoc queries and the like involving objects of class C could now be
      performed after all. (In the example, if GET_X and GET_Y methods were both available for
      points, then ad hoc queries and the like involving points could be performed after all.)

 ■    It is usual in contexts such as the one at hand to speak not of GET_ methods alone, but rather
      of GET_ and SET_ methods. SET_ methods are the update analogs of GET_ methods. In the
      case of points, for example, SET_X and SET_Y methods might be provided to update the x
      and y coordinates, respectively, of a specified POINT variable. And just as the provision of
      GET_ methods for all components of some possrep effectively makes arbitrary queries
      possible, so the provision of SET_ methods for all components of some possrep effectively
      makes arbitrary updates possible too. (More precisely, it is the fact that GET_ and SET_
      methods—or analogs of those methods, rather—are available for all components of some
      possrep together with the fact that invocations of those methods can be arbitrarily nested that
      effectively makes arbitrary queries and updates possible. See RM Prescription 5.)

      In view of the foregoing, we decided in the Manifesto to insist on some appropriate discipline.
To be more specific (and reverting now to our more usual terminology), RM Prescription 4 requires
that:

 ■    Every (nonempty, user-defined, scalar) type T must have at least one declared possrep that is
      capable of representing every value of type T. Note: The Manifesto does not use the
      abbreviation possrep, though we do in this book in our informal explanations. More
      important, recall from Chapter 3 that a (nonempty, user-defined, scalar) type can have any
      number of distinct possreps, just so long as it has at least one. A type can also have a possrep
      that is not declared (such would be the case with points, for example, if we omitted to declare
      the polar possrep). Clearly, however, an undeclared possrep is of little interest; in fact, we
      adopt the obvious convention that from this point forward the unqualified term possible




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 146
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                     Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


        representation and its abbreviated form possrep always mean a declared possrep specifically,
        barring explicit statements to the contrary.

    ■   Declaring a possrep causes “automatic” definition of a corresponding selector (and selectors
        cannot be defined in any other way).1 Possreps and selectors are thus in one-to-one
        correspondence with each other; for every possrep there is a unique corresponding selector
        and vice versa. (In fact, possrep components and selector parameters are in one-to-one
        correspondence, too.) In Tutorial D, therefore, we adopt the obvious convention of giving
        the selector and the corresponding possrep the same name, to underscore their hand-in-glove
        relationship (though they are logically distinct concepts).

      And RM Prescription 5, q.v., goes on to insist that GET_ and SET_ operators, or something
logically equivalent to such operators, be “automatically” provided for every component of every
possrep. Note: As we know, Tutorial D actually supports THE_ operators instead of GET_ and
SET_ operators as such, for reasons to be explained under RM Prescription 5. Observe too that—in
contrast to the situation found in some object systems—the semantics of those operators are
prescribed by the model and cannot be overridden. What is more, analogous remarks apply to all of
the operators that are prescribed by the model, including “=”, “:=”, and selector operators in
particular.

System-Defined Types

The situation regarding possreps and selectors for system-defined scalar types was discussed in
Chapter 3. Here we just remind you that:

    ■   It is likely that some system-defined types will have possreps and selectors just as user-
        defined types do. Type DATE (Gregorian dates) might be an example; type COMPLEX
        (complex numbers) might be another.

    ■   Others will have no declared possrep at all (type INTEGER might be an example). For such a
        type, however, the system will at least support a limited form of selector that permits literals
        of the type in question to be specified.

Miscellaneous Issues

We close this section with a number of miscellaneous points having to do with physical vs. possible
representations and the associated notion of selectors:

    ■   In accordance with RM Proscription 6 (see Chapter 7), physical representations are not visible
        in D. Rather (as RM Prescription 4 in fact requires), they are specified by means of some
        logically distinct storage structure definition language, details of which are beyond the scope
        of both the Manifesto and this book.


1
  As noted in Chapter 3, “automatic” here probably does not mean automated (at least in the case of a user-defined
type). An analogous remark applies to THE_ operators also (see RM Prescription 5).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                  page 147
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                          Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


    ■    Despite the previous point, it might help to stress the fact (already mentioned in Chapter 1)
         that if v1 and v2 are distinct appearances of values of type T, there is no requirement that the
         physical representations of v1 and v2 be of the same form. For instance, one appearance of a
         certain integer might have a packed decimal physical representation and another—possibly of
         the very same integer—a pure binary physical representation. We observe, however, that in
         such a situation the system would have to know how to convert between the physical
         representations in question, in order to be able to implement assignments and comparisons
         correctly.

    ■    We remark that the relational model effectively requires relations—and, implicitly, tuples
         also—to have “possreps” that are visible to the user (we discussed this notion in Chapter 3;
         the user-visible components are the corresponding attributes, of course). In effect, therefore,
         what RM Prescriptions 4 and 5 do is prescribe facilities for scalars that are analogous to
         certain facilities already prescribed for tuples and relations by the relational model.

    ■    It is an open question as to whether any scalar type T can have a possrep that is defined,
         directly or indirectly, in terms of T itself. More precisely, let T be a scalar type, and let S(1),
         S(2), ... be a sequence of sets defined as follows:

         S(1) = { t : t is the declared type of some scalar component,
                        or the declared type of some attribute of some
                        tuple- or relation-valued component, of some possrep for T }

         S(i) = { t : t is the declared type of some scalar component,
                         or the declared type of some attribute of some
                         tuple- or relation-valued component, of some possrep for some type in S(i-1) }
                                      (i > 1)

         If there exists some n (n > 0) such that T is a member of S(n), then T is recursively defined.1
         Thus, the open question is whether recursively defined scalar types should be permitted. We
         do not feel obliged to legislate on this question so far as our model is concerned; for the
         purposes of the present book, however, we follow The Principle of Cautious Design [46] and
         assume (where it makes any difference) that such types are not permitted. We remark that if
         T is not recursively defined, then there will exist some n (n > 0) such that every type in S(n) is
         system defined.

    ■    Turning now to selectors: Observe first that selector operators are read-only, by definition.
         Further, RM Prescription 4 requires, reasonably enough, that if S is a selector for type T, then:
         ●     S is of declared type T (thus, no invocation of S ever yields a value not of type T).

         ●     Every value of type T is obtainable by some invocation of S in which the arguments are
               all literals specifically, meaning the invocation in question is a literal (of type T) in turn.
               In other words, there must be a means of specifying an arbitrary literal of type T.

1
    This definition requires a slight extension if type inheritance is supported (see Chapter 12).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                  page 148
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                       Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


    ■   Note that it is possible for two distinct invocations of a given selector to return the same
        value; for example, the expressions 3.0 and 3.00 both denote the same rational number. See
        RM Prescription 8 for further discussion of this point.

     We close this section with a brief examination of the logical difference between selectors as
we have defined them and the constructors typically found in place of such selectors in object
languages:

    ■   What a selector does is select some value (what the object world calls an immutable object)
        from some specific set of values. For example, the expression 3 can be regarded as a selector
        invocation that selects the value three from the set of integers (i.e., from type INTEGER).

    ■   By contrast, what a constructor does is allocate storage for some variable (what the object
        world calls a mutable object).1 We do not prohibit such operators. Within a database,
        however, the only variables we permit are, very specifically, relation variables (see RM
        Prescriptions 13 and 16). In the case of variables in databases, therefore:

        ●   The only “constructor” we permit is, specifically, the operator that defines a real database
            relvar (see RM Prescription 13). That operator causes any necessary storage allocation to
            be done and initializes the relvar in question.

        ●   Importantly, those relvars, unlike “mutable objects,” are always named. (“Mutable
            objects” typically have no names, in the usual sense of that term; they must therefore be
            referenced by address instead of by name. See OO Proscription 2 in Chapter 9 for further
            discussion of this point.)

        ●   In order to avoid confusion, therefore, we prefer not to use the “constructor” terminology
            at all. Note: For the same reason (i.e., to avoid confusion), we also prefer our type
            generator terminology over the possibly more usual type constructor terminology. See
            RM Prescriptions 6 and 7.


RM PRESCRIPTION 5: EXPOSE POSSIBLE REPRESENTATIONS

Let some declared possible representation PR for values of scalar type T be defined in terms of
components C1, C2, ..., Cn (n  0), each of which has a name and a declared type. Let v be a value
of type T, and let PR(v) denote the possible representation corresponding to PR for that value v.
Then PR(v) shall be exposed—i.e., a set of read-only and update operators shall be provided such
that:




1
  In some object languages, constructors initialize variables instead of or as well as allocating storage for them. We note
in passing that SQL also supports something it calls constructors, but SQL’s constructors are not constructors in the
object sense at all. See Chapter 10 (RM Very Strong Suggestion 8) or Appendix H for further explanation.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     page 149
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                             Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


 a.   For all such values v and for all i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), it shall be possible to “retrieve” (i.e., read
      the value of) the Ci component of PR(v). The read-only operator that provides this
      functionality shall have declared type the same as that of Ci.

 b.   For all variables V of declared type T and for all i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), it shall be possible to
      update V in such a way that if the values of V before and after the update are v and v'
      respectively, then the possible representations corresponding to PR for v and v' (i.e., PR(v)
      and PR(v'), respectively) differ in their Ci components.

Such a set of operators shall be provided for each possible representation declared for values of
type T.

                                        ———  ———

Once again we split our discussion into three subsections, one each for user-defined and system-
defined types and one with a few miscellaneous observations, and we assume for simplicity that all
types are scalar and nonempty.

User-Defined Types

We explained the basic motivation behind RM Prescription 5 in the previous section; here we focus
on the specific syntax used in Tutorial D in this connection, since that syntax has been designed to
serve as a good realization of exactly the semantics we desire, no more and no less. Let PR be a
possrep for type T, and let PR have components C1, C2, ..., Cn. Define THE_C1, THE_C2, ...,
THE_Cn to be a family of operators such that, for each i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), THE_Ci has the following
properties:

 ■    Its sole parameter is of declared type T.

 ■    If the invocation THE_Ci(v) appears in a source position—e.g., on the right side of an
      assignment—then it returns the Ci component of the value v. (More precisely, it returns the
      value of the Ci component of the possible representation PR(v) of the value of its argument
      expression v.)

 ■    If the invocation THE_Ci(V) appears in a target position—e.g., on the left side of an
      assignment—then:

      ●   First, the argument expression V must consist of a variable reference specifically. (Recall
          that we regard pseudovariables as variables, however.)

      ●   Second, the expression serves as a pseudovariable reference, which means that it
          actually designates—instead of just returning the value of—the Ci component of that
          variable. (More precisely, it designates the Ci component of the possible representation
          PR(V) of that variable; here we are extending our “PR(v)” notation in a slight and
          obvious way.)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         page 150
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                   Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


     We gave several examples of the use of THE_ operators and pseudovariables in Chapter 3.
Here we just remind you of the following:

    ■   Any assignment that involves a pseudovariable is logically equivalent to another that does not
        (i.e., pseudovariables are just shorthand, loosely speaking). For example, if P and Z are a
        variable of type POINT and an expression of type RATIONAL, respectively, then the
        assignment
        THE_X ( P ) := Z ;

        is shorthand for this one:
        P := POINT ( Z, THE_Y ( P ) ) ;

        By the way, it follows from this point (no pun intended) that we could satisfy part b. of RM
        Prescription 5 with assignment alone, just so long as the read-only THE_ operators were
        available.

    ■   THE_ operator invocations can be nested, in both source and target positions.1 For example,
        let type LINESEG have a possrep with components BEGIN and END, both of type POINT,
        and let Z and LS be variables of types RATIONAL and LINESEG, respectively. Then both
        of the following assignments are valid:
        Z := THE_X ( THE_BEGIN ( LS ) ) ;

        THE_X ( THE_BEGIN ( LS ) ) := Z ;

       Incidentally, we can use this LINESEG example to show why we prefer our THE_ operators
over the more traditional GET_ and SET_ operators. The basic point is precisely that THE_
pseudovariable references can be nested whereas SET_ operator invocations cannot. (Recall that
SET_ operators are update operators, meaning among other things that—in our model, at any rate,
but for good reasons!—invoking such an operator does not return a value.) Thus, for example, a
“SET_ operator” analog of the second of the foregoing assignments would have to look something
like this:
        VAR Q POINT ;

        Q := GET_BEGIN ( LS ) ;
        CALL SET_X ( Q, Z ) ;                   /* set X component of Q      = Z */
        CALL SET_BEGIN ( LS, Q ) ;              /* set BEGIN component of LS = Q */

      This example shows why we prefer THE_ pseudovariables to SET_ operators. For
symmetry, therefore, we also prefer THE_ operators (read-only operators, that is) to GET_
operators—though here we are really talking about a purely syntactic issue, not a logical difference,

1
  As noted in Chapter 3, the term pseudovariable is taken from PL/I; observe, however, that we allow pseudovariable
references to be nested, whereas PL/I does not. Observe too that we use the terms invocation and reference
interchangeably in connection with pseudovariables.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                 page 151
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                      Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


since GET_ operators are read-only and invocations of read-only operators can be nested as deep as
we like.
      A few further syntactic points:

 ■   As noted in Chapter 3, we assume for simplicity that all operators with names of the form
     THE_C are indeed THE_ operators of the kind we have been discussing.

 ■   In practice, a more user-friendly way of meeting the requirements of the present prescription
     might use some kind of dot-qualification syntax. For example, the two assignments shown
     earlier involving variables Z and LS might better be expressed as follows:
     Z := LS.BEGIN.X ;

     LS.BEGIN.X := Z ;

     In this book, however, we will stay with our THE_ notation.

 ■   Note that it is a logical consequence of the Tutorial D approach to RM Prescription 5 that if
     PR1 and PR2 are distinct possreps for the same type T, then PR1 and PR2 cannot have any
     component names in common; for if PR1 and PR2 both had a component called C, and if x
     were an expression of type T, then the expression THE_C(x) would be ambiguous.

System-Defined Types

The situation regarding THE_ operators for system-defined types, like that regarding possreps and
selectors, was discussed in Chapter 3. Just to remind you briefly:

 ■   It is likely that some system-defined types will have possreps, and hence THE_ operators, just
     as user-defined types do. For example, type COMPLEX (complex numbers) might have a
     possrep with components REAL and IMAG, and corresponding THE_ operators THE_REAL
     and THE_IMAG.

 ■   Others will have no declared possrep at all; type INTEGER might be an example. Such a
     type has no THE_ operators (and no need for them, either).

Miscellaneous Issues

We close this section with a number of miscellaneous points having to do with THE_ operators and
related matters.

 ■   Let type T have a possrep PR with just one component C. Then there is not much point,
     though nothing logically wrong, in using THE_C as a pseudovariable, because it saves little
     (it is no simpler than its longhand counterpart in this particular case). By way of example,
     recall that type LENGTH has a possrep with just one component, M. Let variable L be of
     type LENGTH, then, and consider the following logically equivalent assignments:
     THE_M ( L ) := 5.0 ;           /* “shorthand” */




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                page 152
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      L := LENGTH ( 5.0 ) ;           /* “longhand”      */

 ■    Once again, let type T have a possrep PR with components C1, C2, ..., Cn. Observe now that
      it is desirable that those components be mutually independent (i.e., orthogonal)—for
      otherwise, if V is a variable of type T, then updating THE_Ci(V) might affect THE_Cj(V) for
      some j (j ≠ i). Here is a somewhat contrived example. Consider type POINT, whose
      cartesian possrep has two components X and Y, both of type RATIONAL. Suppose we
      replace that possrep by one involving two rational numbers X and Z, where X is as before and
      Z = X + Y (i.e., the z value for any given point is the sum of the x and y values for that point).
      Using an obvious shorthand notation, then, updating x to 4 for the point with x = 2 and z = 3,
      say, will actually yield the point with x = 4 and z = 5, thereby causing z to be updated as a side
      effect.

 ■    It follows as a special case of the foregoing bullet item that it is desirable that no component
      Ci of PR be logically redundant—where, by the phrase “Ci is logically redundant,” we mean
      that, for all values v of type T, THE_Ci(v) is some function of THE_Cj(v), ..., THE_Ck(v) for
      some j, ..., k all distinct from i.

 ■    Note finally that, logically speaking, declaring a possrep PR for type T is really just shorthand
      for specifying that certain operators are available for values and variables of type T: namely, a
      certain selector and certain THE_ operators. In the case of type POINT, for example,
      declaring the cartesian possrep (with the same name POINT and with components X and Y,
      both of type RATIONAL) really means that:

      ●   There exists a read-only operator (a selector) called POINT that takes two arguments,
          both of type RATIONAL, and returns a result of type POINT.

      ●   A given value is of type POINT if and only if it is returned by some invocation of that
          POINT operator.

      ●   There exist two read-only operators called THE_X and THE_Y, respectively, each of
          which takes just one parameter (of type POINT) and returns a result of type RATIONAL.
          Let p be a value of type POINT, and let POINT(x,y) be the POINT invocation that returns
          p. Then THE_X(p) returns x and THE_Y(p) returns y.

      ●   THE_X and THE_Y pseudovariables are also available.


RM PRESCRIPTION 6: TYPE GENERATOR TUPLE

D shall support the TUPLE type generator. That is, given some heading H (see RM Prescription
9), D shall support use of the generated type TUPLE H as a basis for defining (or, in the case of
values, selecting):

 a.   Values of that type (see RM Prescription 9)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 153
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                        Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


 b.   Variables of that type (see RM Prescription 12)

 c.   Attributes of that type (see RM Prescriptions 9 and 10)

 d.   Components of that type within declared possible representations (see RM Prescription 5)

 e.   Read-only operators of that type (see RM Prescription 20)

 f.   Parameters of that type to user-defined operators (see RM Prescriptions 3 and 20)

The generated type TUPLE shall be referred to as a tuple type, and the name of that type shall be,
precisely, TUPLE H. The terminology of degree, attributes, and heading introduced in RM
Prescription 9 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to that type, as well as to values and variables of that
type (see RM Prescription 12). Tuple types TUPLE H1 and TUPLE H2 shall be equal if and only if
H1 = H2. The applicable operators shall include operators analogous to the RENAME, project,
EXTEND, and JOIN operators of the relational algebra (see RM Prescription 18), together with
tuple assignment (see RM Prescription 21) and tuple comparisons (see RM Prescription 22); they
shall also include (a) a tuple selector operator (see RM Prescription 9), (b) an operator for
extracting a specified attribute value from a specified tuple (the tuple in question might be required
to be of degree one—see RM Prescription 9), and (c) operators for performing tuple “nesting” and
“unnesting.” [Explanatory note added later]

                                      ———  ———

The main reason the Manifesto talks about tuples at all is because it obviously has to talk about both
relations and scalars, and tuples are the logical middle ground—relations are made out of tuples,
and tuples are made out of scalars, loosely speaking. And since we clearly need to support both
relation values and variables and scalar values and variables, it would seem artificial not to support
tuple values and variables as well. That said, however, we should say too that we do not expect
tuple values and variables to play much of a part in any real application of D except in that “logical
middle ground” kind of way. In particular, we remind you that we do not permit tuple variables—
or scalar variables, come to that—within a database (see RM Prescription 16).
       RM Prescription 6 depends heavily on RM Prescription 9, where the concept of a tuple is
precisely defined. But the basic ideas were covered in earlier chapters; in particular, Chapter 2
explained the terminology of degree, attributes, and heading, and Chapter 3 discussed tuple type
inference, the attribute extractor operator, and the general notion of type generators (of which the
TUPLE type generator is an important special case). We therefore concentrate here on aspects of
RM Prescription 6 that were not covered in those earlier chapters. We begin with an example:
      VAR ADDR TUPLE { STREET CHAR, CITY CHAR, STATE CHAR, ZIP CHAR } ;

      The expression TUPLE{...} here is an invocation of the TUPLE type generator; the statement
overall defines a tuple variable called ADDR, of type
      TUPLE { STREET CHAR, CITY CHAR, STATE CHAR, ZIP CHAR }




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   page 154
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                           Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


—an example of a generated (tuple) type. Just to remind you:

 ■    Each of the four name/type pairs is an attribute (and the set of all four attributes is the
      heading) of that tuple type, and the degree of that tuple type is four.

 ■    Since the attributes within the braces constitute a set, the order in which they are specified is
      immaterial. Thus, the tuple type under discussion could equally well be represented as, for
      example,
      TUPLE { ZIP CHAR, STREET CHAR, STATE CHAR, CITY CHAR }

      Note: An analogous observation applies to all constructs in Tutorial D that denote sets; we
      will not bother to say so explicitly every time we encounter such a construct but will let this
      one paragraph do duty for all.

 ■    Variable ADDR has the same attributes, heading, and degree as the type does, and so do all
      possible values of that variable.

       Note, incidentally, that the attributes in the example all happen to have the same type
(CHAR), but of course different attributes can have different types, in general. (They must have
different names, of course, as we know from Chapter 2. See also RM Prescription 9.) Note too that
Tutorial D deliberately does not provide a separate “define tuple type” operator. One reason (not
the only one) for this omission is that such an operator would presumably involve the introduction
of a name for the tuple type in question—i.e., a name over and above the name TUPLE{...} that it
already has—and such names would complicate other aspects of our proposal: the question of when
two tuple types are equal, for example. For such reasons, we simply permit tuple types to be used
inline, as it were (as in the example), without requiring, or indeed permitting, them to be separately
defined.
       Here now is an example of a tuple assignment:
      ADDR := TUPLE { STREET '1600 Pennsylvania Ave.',
                      CITY   'Washington',
                      STATE 'DC',
                      ZIP    '20500' } ;

       The expression on the right side of this assignment is a tuple selector invocation (in fact, it is a
tuple literal). In general, the tuple variable on the left of a tuple assignment and the tuple expression
on the right must be of the same type—i.e., they must have the same attribute names, and
corresponding attributes must be of the same type in turn.
       Tutorial D also supports a shorthand form of tuple assignment, as illustrated by this example:
      UPDATE ADDR ( ZIP := '20501' ) ;

This statement is shorthand for the following:
      ADDR := UPDATE ADDR ( ZIP := '20501' ) ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         page 155
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                        Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


(The expression on the right side here is a “tuple substitute” invocation.) Expanding the expression
on the right side, this statement in turn is shorthand for the following:
      ADDR := ( ( EXTEND ADDR ADD ( '20501' AS NEWZIP ) ) { ALL BUT ZIP } )
                RENAME ( NEWZIP AS ZIP ) ;

And this statement is clearly equivalent to:
      ADDR := TUPLE { STREET FROM ADDR , CITY FROM ADDR , STATE                  FROM ADDR ,
                      ZIP '20501' } ;

       Note the use of attribute extractor operations in this last assignment. We discussed attribute
extractors in Chapter 3; here we just remark that it might be more user friendly in practice to
support some kind of dot-qualification syntax for them, thereby writing, e.g., ADDR.STATE
instead of STATE FROM ADDR. It might even be desirable to extend that syntax to allow, e.g.,
expressions of the form A.B.C.D, where A denotes some tuple with a tuple-valued component B—
see later in this section—and B has a tuple-valued component C and C has a component D (which
might or might not itself be tuple valued). In this book, however, we will stay with our FROM
notation.
       Here now is an example of a tuple equality comparison:
      ADDR = TUPLE { STREET '1600 Pennsylvania Ave.', CITY                  'Washington',
                     STATE 'DC', ZIP     '20500' }

The comparands must be of the same type.
      RM Prescription 6 also requires support for “operators analogous to the RENAME, project,
EXTEND, and JOIN operators of the relational algebra.” Here are some examples (we assume that
ADDR has the same White House address as its initial value in every case). Note that, by virtue of
the tuple type inference mechanism described in Chapter 3, the type of the result in every case is
self-evident.
      ADDR RENAME ( ZIP AS POSTCODE )           /* tuple attribute renaming */

      Result:    TUPLE { STREET        '1600 Pennsylvania Ave.', CITY              'Washington',
                         STATE         'DC', POSTCODE '20500' }

      ADDR RENAME ( PREFIX 'ST' AS 'G' )             /* ditto, prefix variant */

      Result:    TUPLE { GREET '1600 Pennsylvania Ave.', CITY               'Washington',
                         GATE 'DC', ZIP    '20500' }

      ADDR { STATE, ZIP }                                     /* tuple project */

      Result:    TUPLE { STATE 'DC', ZIP           '20500' }

      ADDR { ALL BUT CITY, STREET }             /* ditto, “ALL BUT” variant */

      Result:    Same as previous example.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   page 156
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                           Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      EXTEND ADDR ADD ( NAME('Clark Kent') AS NAME )                  /* tuple extend */

      Result:    TUPLE { NAME   NAME('Clark Kent'),
                         STREET '1600 Pennsylvania Ave.',
                         CITY   'Washington',
                         STATE 'DC',
                         ZIP    '20500' } ;

       ADDR UNION                     /* tuple union aka tuple join */
                TUPLE { NAME NAME('Clark Kent'), COUNTRY 'USA' }

       Result:     TUPLE { NAME    NAME('Clark Kent'),
                           STREET '1600 Pennsylvania Ave.',
                           CITY    'Washington',
                           STATE   'DC',
                           ZIP     '20500',
                           COUNTRY 'USA' }

      Several points arise in connection with tuple union in particular:

 ■    First, if the operands have any attributes in common, then each such attribute must have the
      same value in both.

 ■    Second, the operator might equally well be called tuple join.

 ■    Third, Tutorial D also supports an n-adic form of the operator (see Chapter 5).

 ■    Fourth, we are overloading the name UNION, since of course we support such an operator for
      relations as well as tuples. Note: A similar remark applies to the operators RENAME,
      project, and EXTEND among others.

 ■    Finally, observe that tuple union and tuple extend can each be expressed in terms of the other.

       Actually, Tutorial D goes beyond RM Prescription 6 in that it supports tuple analogs of
certain other relational operators also: COMPOSE, WRAP/UNWRAP, and substitute or UPDATE.
We omit the details here, except to say that WRAP and UNWRAP together provide the required
tuple “nest” and “unnest” capabilities. (RM Prescription 6 refers to those capabilities as nesting and
unnesting rather than wrapping and unwrapping because nesting and unnesting are the terms most
commonly used in the literature. We prefer our wrap/unwrap terminology, however, because the
nest/unnest terminology carries too much baggage with it. See in particular the remark concerning
“NF² relations” under RM Prescription 7, later in this chapter.)
       Next, note that (as indicated in the discussion of attribute extractors earlier) the Manifesto
requires support for tuples—and relations also—with tuple-valued attributes (and all D operators
that apply to tuples in general are available for values of the attributes in question). For example,
the following Tutorial D statement defines a variable of a tuple type for which one of the attributes
is of another such type:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   page 157
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                        Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


       VAR NADDR2 TUPLE { NAME NAME,
                          ADDR TUPLE { STREET CHAR,
                                       CITY   CHAR,
                                       STATE CHAR,
                                       ZIP    CHAR } } ;

       Notice the logical difference between this variable and the following one:
       VAR NADDR5 TUPLE { NAME   NAME,
                          STREET CHAR,
                          CITY   CHAR,
                          STATE CHAR,
                          ZIP    CHAR } ;

NADDR5 has five attributes; NADDR2, by contrast, has just two.
      Finally, it is an open question as to whether any heading can be defined, directly or indirectly,
in terms of itself (and hence whether any tuple type can be defined in terms of itself). More
precisely, let H be a heading, and let S(1), S(2), ... be a sequence of sets defined as follows:

       S(1) = { t : t is the declared type of some attribute in H }

       S(i) = { t : t is the declared type of some component of some possrep for some scalar type,
                      or the declared type of some attribute of some tuple or relation type, in S(i-1) }
                      (i > 1)

      If there exists some n (n > 0) such that TUPLE H or RELATION H is a member of S(n), then
the heading H is recursively defined.1 Thus, the open question is whether recursively defined
headings should be permitted. We do not feel obliged to legislate on this question so far as our
model is concerned; for the purposes of the present book, however, we follow The Principle of
Cautious Design [46] and assume (where it makes any difference) that such headings are not
permitted. We remark that if H is not recursively defined, then there will exist some n (n > 0) such
that every type in S(n) is system defined.

Tuple Types vs. Possreps

You might have noticed a certain similarity between Tutorial D’s tuple type syntax (in a TUPLE
type generator invocation) and its possrep definition syntax (in a scalar type definition): Both
basically involve a commalist of components, each consisting of a name and a type, and you might
be wondering whether there are two concepts here or only one. In fact there are two (and the
syntactic similarity is unimportant). For example, if A and B are tuple types, then we might very
well want to join values of those types together; but if they are possreps, then there is no question of
wanting to join values of those possreps—or values of the scalar types corresponding to those
possreps—together.
      There is more to be said, however. Consider the following tuple type (let us call it TT):


1
 As with recursively defined scalar types, this definition requires a slight extension if type inheritance is supported (see
Chapter 12).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       page 158
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      TUPLE { NAME NAME, STREET CHAR, CITY CHAR, STATE CHAR, ZIP CHAR }

Consider also the following scalar type definition:
      TYPE ST POSSREP { NAME NAME, STREET CHAR, CITY CHAR, STATE CHAR, ZIP CHAR } ;

      Now, clearly there is some relationship between tuple type TT and scalar type ST. In order to
see what that relationship is, let t be a tuple variable of type TT. Then the following expression
(actually a scalar selector invocation)—
      ST ( NAME FROM t , STREET FROM t , CITY FROM t , STATE FROM t , ZIP FROM t )

—will return a scalar value of type ST. Likewise, if s is a scalar variable of type ST, then the tuple
selector invocation—
       TUPLE { NAME THE_NAME ( s ) , STREET THE_STREET ( s ) ,
               CITY THE_CITY ( s ) , STATE THE_STATE ( s ) ,
               ZIP THE_ZIP ( s ) }

—will return a tuple value of type TT. In other words, there is a one-to-one correspondence
between tuple values t of type TT and scalar values s of type ST. And it might be desirable in
practice to provide some kind of syntactic shorthand for converting from type TT to type ST and
vice versa (perhaps along the lines of the WRAP and UNWRAP operators mentioned earlier).


RM PRESCRIPTION 7: TYPE GENERATOR RELATION

D shall support the RELATION type generator. That is, given some heading H (see RM
Prescription 9), D shall support use of the generated type RELATION H as the basis for defining
(or, in the case of values, selecting):

 a.   Values of that type (see RM Prescription 10)

 b.   Variables of that type (see RM Prescription 13)

 c.   Attributes of that type (see RM Prescriptions 9 and 10)

 d.   Components of that type within declared possible representations (see RM Prescription 5)

 e.   Read-only operators of that type (see RM Prescription 20)

 f.   Parameters of that type to user-defined operators (see RM Prescriptions 3 and 20)

The generated type RELATION H shall be referred to as a relation type, and the name of that type
shall be, precisely, RELATION H. The terminology of degree, attributes, and heading introduced in
RM Prescription 9 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to that type, as well as to values and variables of
that type (see RM Prescription 13). Relation types RELATION H1 and RELATION H2 shall be




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   page 159
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                           Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


equal if and only if H1 = H2. The applicable operators shall include the usual operators of the
relational algebra (see RM Prescription 18), together with relational assignment (see RM
Prescription 21) and relational comparisons (see RM Prescription 22); they shall also include (a) a
relation selector operator (see RM Prescription 10), (b) an operator for extracting the sole tuple
from a specified relation of cardinality one (see RM Prescription 10), and (c) operators for
performing relational “nesting” and “unnesting.”

                                       ———  ———

This prescription has the same general pattern as RM Prescription 6, and the discussions that follow
therefore parallel those in the previous section, somewhat. Again we begin with an example:
      VAR PQ ... RELATION { P# P#, QTY QTY } ... ;

(We have omitted portions of the definition that are irrelevant to our main purpose.) The expression
RELATION{...} is an invocation of the RELATION type generator; the statement overall defines a
relation variable (or relvar) called PQ, of type
      RELATION { P# P#, QTY QTY }

—an example of a generated (relation) type. Each of the name/type pairs is an attribute (and the set
containing both of them is the heading) of that relation type, and the degree of that type is two;
moreover, relvar PQ has the same attributes, heading, and degree as the type does, and so do all
possible values of that variable.
      Note that Tutorial D deliberately does not provide a separate “define relation type” operator,
for much the same reasons that it does not provide an explicit “define tuple type” operator. Instead,
we simply permit relation types to be used inline, as it were (as in the example), without requiring,
or indeed permitting, them to be separately defined.
      Here now is an example of a relation assignment:
      PQ := RELATION { TUPLE { P# P#('P1'), QTY QTY( 600) } ,
                       TUPLE { P# P#('P5'), QTY QTY( 500) } ,
                       TUPLE { QTY QTY(1000), P# P#('P2') } ,
                       TUPLE { P# P#('P4'), QTY QTY( 500) } ,
                       TUPLE { QTY QTY( 400), P# P#('P3') } ,
                       TUPLE { P# P#('P6'), QTY QTY( 100) } } ;

       The expression on the right side of this assignment is a relation selector invocation (in fact, it
is a relation literal). In general, the relvar on the left of a relation assignment and the relational
expression on the right must be of the same type—i.e., they must have the same attribute names,
and corresponding attributes must be of the same type in turn. Here is another example:
      PQ := SUMMARIZE SP PER ( P { P# } ) ADD ( SUM ( QTY ) AS QTY ) ;

      This statement assigns to relvar PQ a relation consisting of part numbers from relvar P and
corresponding total quantities from relvar SP (speaking a trifle loosely
      The next example illustrates the required tuple extractor operator, which extracts the sole
tuple from a relation of cardinality one:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 160
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                   Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


       VAR PQX TUPLE { P# P#, QTY QTY } ;

       PQX := TUPLE FROM ( PQ WHERE P# = P#('P1') ) ;

       (The tuple extractor invocation here is the expression on the right side of the assignment.) A
run-time error will occur if the expression following TUPLE FROM in a tuple extractor invocation
returns a relation of cardinality anything other than one.
       Tutorial D also supports the usual INSERT, DELETE, and UPDATE shorthand forms of
relation assignment. Here are some examples. First, INSERT:
       INSERT PQ ( SUMMARIZE SP PER ( P { P# } ) ADD ( SUM ( QTY ) AS QTY ) ) ;

Expanded form:
       PQ := PQ UNION ( SUMMARIZE SP PER ( P { P# } ) ADD ( SUM ( QTY ) AS QTY ) ) ;

This expansion implies that an attempt to insert a tuple that is already present is not an error;
however, we would not object if the implementation did so regard it. If it did, the UNION in the
expansion would have to be replaced by D_UNION (see Chapter 2).1
      Next, a DELETE example:
       DELETE SP WHERE S# = S#('S4') OR S# = S#('S5') ;

Expanded form:
       SP := SP WHERE NOT ( S# = S#('S4') OR S# = S#('S5') ) ;

We do not legislate on the question of whether it is an error if the DELETE has no effect (i.e., if the
relation denoted by the expression following the DELETE keyword is empty), but the foregoing
expansion assumes it is not.
       Finally, an UPDATE example:
       UPDATE S WHERE CITY = 'Paris' ( STATUS := 2 * STATUS , CITY := 'Nice' ) ;

Expanded form:
        S := ( S WHERE NOT ( CITY = 'Paris' ) )
               UNION
             ( UPDATE S WHERE CITY = 'Paris'
                      ( STATUS := 2 * STATUS , CITY := 'Nice' ) ) ;

We do not legislate on the question of whether it is an error if the UPDATE has no effect (i.e., if the
relation denoted by the expression between the UPDATE keyword and the opening parenthesis is
empty), but the foregoing expansion assumes it is not. Note: The expression denoting the second
UNION operand in that expansion is an invocation of the substitute operator. As explained in
Chapters 2 and 5, it is shorthand for an expression that might look like this:

1
  Alternatively, we might consider providing two different shorthands: INSERT, which does not regard an attempt to
insert an existing tuple as an error, and D_INSERT, which does (thanks to Jonathan Leffler for this suggestion).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                page 161
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                           Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


       WITH ( S WHERE CITY = 'Paris' ) AS T1 ,
            ( EXTEND T1 ADD ( 2 * STATUS AS NEW_STATUS ,
                              'Nice' AS NEW_CITY ) ) AS T2 ,
              T2 { ALL BUT STATUS, CITY } AS T3 ,
            ( T3 RENAME ( NEW_STATUS AS STATUS , NEW_CITY AS CITY ) ) AS T4 :
       T4

      Now we turn our attention to relation comparisons. Here is an example:
      PQ  ( SUMMARIZE SP PER ( P { P# } )
                          ADD ( SUM ( QTY ) AS QTY ) )

As explained under RM Prescription 22, the comparands must be of the same type.
       RM Prescription 7 also requires support for “the usual operators of the relational algebra.”
However, we defer discussion of this requirement to the section on RM Prescription 18, later
(except to say that the required relational “nest” and “unnest” capabilities are provided by GROUP
and UNGROUP, which were discussed in Chapter 2).
       Next, recall from Chapter 2 that the Manifesto requires support for relations (and tuples) with
relation-valued attributes, and all D operators that apply to relations in general are available for
values of the attributes in question. (However, we explicitly do not espouse NF²—“NF squared”—
relations as described in, e.g., reference [122], because they involve significant extensions to the
classical relational algebra, extensions that we find unnecessary.) By way of example, the
following Tutorial D statement defines a variable of a relation type for which one of the attributes
is of another such type:
      VAR SPQ ... RELATION { S# S#,
                             PQ RELATION { P#               P#, QTY QTY } } ... ;

      Notice the logical difference between this relvar and our usual shipments relvar SP—SP has
three attributes; SPQ, by contrast, has just two.
      We remark in passing that operations on relations and relvars with relation-valued attributes
can become quite complex. Here by way of example are a couple of UPDATEs involving relvar
SPQ:
      UPDATE SPQ WHERE S# = S#('S2')
           ( UPDATE PQ WHERE P# = P#('P3') ( QTY := QTY * 2 ) ) ;

      UPDATE SPQ WHERE S# = S#('S2')
           ( INSERT PQ RELATION { TUPLE { P#               P#('P5'), QTY QTY(500) } } ) ;

Exercise: Give relational assignments that are equivalent to these two UPDATE statements.
       Finally, we remind you from our discussion of RM Prescription 6 that it is an open question
as to whether any heading can be defined, directly or indirectly, in terms of itself; it is therefore also
an open question as to whether any relation type can be defined in terms of itself. However, we
assume for the purposes of this book (where it makes any difference) that such headings and
relation types are not permitted.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 162
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


RM PRESCRIPTION 8: EQUALITY

D shall support the equality comparison operator “=” for every type T. Let Op be an operator
with a parameter P, let P be such that the argument corresponding to P in some invocation of Op is
allowed to be of type T, and let v1 and v2 be values of type T. Then v1 = v2 shall evaluate to
TRUE if and only if, for all such operators Op, two successful invocations of Op that are identical
in all respects except that the argument corresponding to P is v1 in one invocation and v2 in the
other are indistinguishable in their effect.

                                          ———  ———

We discussed the equality operator in some detail in Chapter 3. The definition given above is
essentially standard (see, e.g., reference [10]). By way of example, let CH2 and CH3 denote the
CHAR values 'AB' and 'AB ', respectively (note the trailing space in CH3). Suppose further that—
as is not the case in Tutorial D—type CHAR were defined in such a way that the comparison CH2
= CH3 gave TRUE. Then the operator CHAR_LENGTH (see Chapter 2) would have to be defined
in such a way that the comparison CHAR_LENGTH (CH2) = CHAR_LENGTH (CH3) gave TRUE
also.1 Conversely, if CHAR_LENGTH, or any other operator on character strings, gives a different
result depending on whether it is invoked on CH2 or CH3, then by definition the comparison CH2 =
CH3 must give FALSE.
       Next, observe that the phrase “for all such operators Op” in RM Prescription 8 applies to
THE_ operators in particular, a fact that has some important consequences. To elaborate, let type T
have a possrep PR that involves a component C. Let expressions X1 and X2 denote values of type
T. If THE_C(X1) ≠ THE_C(X2), then X1 ≠ X2 as explained above (i.e., X1 and X2 denote distinct
values). It follows that no value of type T can possibly be represented in two different ways using
the same possrep PR. By way of example, suppose type RATIONAL is not built in and we wish to
define such a type for ourselves. One possrep we might consider is pairs of integers, representing
the numerator and denominator of the rational value in question:
      TYPE RATIONAL ORDINAL POSSREP { N INTEGER, D INTEGER CONSTRAINT D > 0 } ;

       However, this definition is inadequate as it stands, because it would allow, e.g., (3,2), (6,4),
(9,6), ... all as equally valid representations for the rational number 1.5. We therefore need to
extend the CONSTRAINT specification appropriately, perhaps as follows:
      TYPE RATIONAL ORDINAL POSSREP { N INTEGER, D INTEGER
                                      CONSTRAINT D > 0 AND COPRIME ( N, D ) } ;

      Here we assume the existence of an operator COPRIME that returns TRUE if its two integer
arguments have no common factors other than unity and FALSE otherwise. The effect is that the
only valid representation for (e.g.) the rational number 1.5 is the canonical form (3,2). Thus, the
selector invocation

1
  SQL violates RM Prescription 8 on precisely this example, among others. Moreover, if CH2 = CH3 gives TRUE, then
CH3||CH2 = CH2||CH3 (i.e., 'AB AB' = 'ABAB ') should surely give TRUE also, implying that embedded as well as
trailing spaces are meaningless for this particular type; yet this latter comparison in fact gives FALSE in SQL.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            page 163
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


         RATIONAL ( 3, 2 )

will succeed, but the selector invocations
         RATIONAL ( 6, 4 )
         RATIONAL ( 9, 6 )
         RATIONAL ( 12, 8 )

(and many others like them) will fail, because they violate the applicable type constraint.1
      By way of another example, consider the polar possrep for type POINT. Clearly, if
THE_R(p) = LENGTH(0.0) for some point p, then p is the origin, no matter what the value of
THE_THETA(p) might be. In order to comply with RM Prescription 8, therefore, we need to
tighten up our definition of that possrep, perhaps as follows:
         TYPE POINT ... POSSREP POLAR { R LENGTH, THETA ANGLE
                                        CONSTRAINT IF R = LENGTH ( 0.0 )
                                                      THEN THETA = ANGLE ( 0.0 )
                                                   END IF } ;

Now the only valid POLAR invocation for the origin is:
         POLAR ( LENGTH ( 0.0 ), ANGLE ( 0.0 ) )

      Recall now that “=” is overloaded, in the sense that the comparison v1 = v2, where v1 and v2
are of the same type T, is valid for all types T. What is more, we do not preclude the possibility of
allowing v1 and v2 to be of different types (thereby supporting comparisons between, e.g., integers
and rational numbers, or U.S. dollar values and U.K. sterling values); in other words, we do not
preclude the possibility of overloading “=” still further. Tutorial D, however, assumes that the
operator is not further overloaded in this way, but instead requires its operands always to be of the
same type.


RM PRESCRIPTION 9: TUPLES

A heading H is a set of ordered pairs or attributes of the form <A,T>, where:

    a.   A is the name of an attribute of H. No two distinct pairs in H shall have the same attribute
         name.

    b.   T is the name of the declared type of attribute A of H.

The number of pairs in H—equivalently, the number of attributes of H—is the degree of H.
      Now let t be a set of ordered triples <A,T,v>, obtained from H by extending each ordered
pair <A,T> to include an arbitrary value v of type T, called the attribute value for attribute A of t.
Then t is a tuple value (tuple for short) that conforms to heading H; equivalently, t is of the

1
  We remark in passing that an analogous argument does not apply to the built-in type RATIONAL—or more generally
to any built-in type with no declared possrep—because such types have no THE_ operators anyway (thus, e.g., 5.3E1
and .53E2 might both be valid ways of selecting, or specifying, the rational number 53).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                             page 164
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


corresponding tuple type (see RM Prescription 6). The degree of that heading H shall be the
degree of t, and the attributes and corresponding types of that heading H shall be the attributes and
corresponding declared attribute types of t. Given a heading H, a selector operator, of type
TUPLE H, shall be available for selecting an arbitrary tuple conforming to H; every such tuple
shall be produced by some invocation of that selector in which every argument is a literal, and
every successful invocation of that selector shall produce some such tuple.

                                      ———  ———

The purpose of this prescription is simply to pin down the notions of heading and tuple precisely.
Little elaboration should be necessary, since we have already discussed these topics in detail under
RM Prescription 6 and in Chapter 2. However, there are a few points, all of them direct
consequences of the definition, that are worth calling out explicitly:

 ■    No tuple contains anything over and above the prescribed <A,T,v> triples. In particular, there
      are no “hidden” components (a) that can be accessed only by invocation of some special
      operator instead of by means of a simple attribute reference, or (b) that cause invocations of
      the usual operators on tuples—or on relations—to have irregular effects. For example, there
      are no hidden timestamps as are proposed in, e.g., reference [126].

 ■    Note that within any given <A,T,v> triple, T is in fact implied by v, thanks to RM Prescription
      2. This fact is recognized in the syntax of Tutorial D, which in effect represents such triples
      (within tuple selector invocations) by means of <A,v> pairs.

 ■    Tuples and headings of degree zero are valid (indeed, they are required by virtue of RM
      Proscription 5, which is discussed in the next chapter). Let t1 and t2 be two such tuples.
      Then it follows from the definition of tuple equality in Chapter 2 that t1 and t2 are equal; in
      fact, they are the very same tuple. Thus, there is exactly one tuple of degree zero, and we
      refer to it as the 0-tuple or, equivalently, the empty tuple.

 ■    Let attribute <A,T> within heading H be such that type T is empty. Then the tuple type
      TUPLE H is empty as well (meaning there are no tuples of that type).


RM PRESCRIPTION 10: RELATIONS

A relation value r (relation for short) consists of a heading and a body, where:

 a.   The heading of r shall be a heading H as defined in RM Prescription 9; r conforms to that
      heading (equivalently, r is of the corresponding relation type—see RM Prescription 7). The
      degree of that heading H shall be the degree of r, and the attributes and corresponding types
      of that heading H shall be the attributes and corresponding declared attribute types of r.

 b.   The body of r shall be a set B of tuples, all having that same heading H. The cardinality of
      that body shall be the cardinality of r.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 165
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                           Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


Given a heading H, a selector operator, of type RELATION H, shall be available for selecting an
arbitrary relation conforming to H; every such relation shall be produced by some invocation of
that selector in which every argument is a literal, and every successful invocation of that selector
shall produce some such relation. [More text later added here]

                                       ———  ———

This prescription requires little elaboration, since we have already discussed the topic in detail
under RM Prescription 7 and in Chapter 2. There is just one point that is worth discussing further,
as follows. As we saw under RM Prescription 9, tuples of degree zero are valid; thus, relations of
degree zero are necessarily valid as well. In fact, there are exactly two such: one whose body
contains just one tuple—the 0-tuple, of course—and one whose body contains no tuples at all.
Following reference [29], we call these two relations, informally, TABLE_DEE and
TABLE_DUM, respectively (DEE and DUM for short). What makes them so special is the fact
that they can be interpreted as TRUE and FALSE, respectively, as we now explain.
       Consider the projection of the suppliers relvar S on S#:
      S { S# }

       Let us refer to the result of this projection as r; given our usual sample data values, r contains
five tuples. Now consider the projection of that relation r on the empty set of attributes:
      r { }

Clearly, projecting any tuple on no attributes at all yields an empty tuple; thus, every tuple in the
relation r produces an empty tuple when r is projected on no attributes. But all empty tuples are
duplicates of one another; thus, projecting the 5-tuple relation r on no attributes yields a relation
with no attributes and one (empty) tuple, or in other words TABLE_DEE.
       Now recall from Chapter 2 that every relvar has an associated predicate. For relvar S, that
predicate looks something like this:

      Supplier S# is under contract, is named SNAME, has status STATUS, and is located in city
      CITY.

For the projection r = S{S#}, it looks like this:

      There exists some name SNAME and some status STATUS and some city CITY such that
      supplier S# is under contract, is named SNAME, has status STATUS, and is located in city
      CITY.

And for the projection r{}, it looks like this:

      There exists some supplier number S# and some name SNAME and some status STATUS and
      some city CITY such that supplier S# is under contract, is named SNAME, has status
      STATUS, and is located in city CITY.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 166
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                     Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      Observe now that this last predicate is in fact a proposition:1 It evaluates to TRUE or FALSE,
unconditionally. In the case at hand, r{} is TABLE_DEE and the predicate (proposition) clearly
evaluates to TRUE. But suppose no suppliers at all were represented in the database at this time.
Then S{S#} would yield an empty relation r, r{} would be TABLE_DUM, and the predicate
(proposition) in question would evaluate to FALSE.
      Now, it is well known that, in logic, TRUE is the identity with respect to AND; that is, if p is
an arbitrary proposition, then the expressions p AND TRUE and TRUE AND p both reduce to
simply p. Analogously, 0 is the identity with respect to “+”, and 1 is the identity with respect to
“*”, in ordinary arithmetic; that is, for all numbers x, the expressions x + 0, 0 + x, x * 1, and 1 * x all
reduce to simply x. In the same kind of way, in the relational algebra, TABLE_DEE is the identity
with respect to JOIN; that is, the join of any relation r with TABLE_DEE is simply r.2 In
particular, therefore, just as the AND of no propositions is TRUE, the sum of no numbers is zero,
and the product of no numbers is one, so the join of no relations is TABLE_DEE. (In Chapter 2
we simply stated this fact without any justification; now, however, we have justified it.)


RM PRESCRIPTION 11: SCALAR VARIABLES

D shall provide facilities for users to define scalar variables. Each scalar variable shall be named
and shall have a specified nonempty (scalar) declared type. Let scalar variable V be of declared
type T; for so long as variable V exists, it shall have a value that is of type T. Defining V shall have
the effect of initializing V to some value—either a value specified explicitly as part of the operation
that defines V, or some implementation-defined value if no such explicit value is specified.
[Explanatory note added later]

                                             ———  ———

This prescription does not seem to require much in the way of further explanation, except perhaps
for the part concerning initialization. (The remarks that follow apply to all kinds of variables,
mutatis mutandis, not just to scalar variables specifically.)
      It is our position that a variable that has no value is a contradiction in terms; in particular,
therefore, variables in D are always initialized, at least implicitly. (Of course, this fact does not
prohibit an implementation from flagging any attempt to reference a variable that has not yet been
explicitly assigned a value.) Here by way of example are a few Tutorial D scalar variable
definitions with explicit INIT specifications (note how—as the comments indicate—the type of the
variable is inferred from the type of the INIT expression in each of these examples):
       VAR N INIT ( 0 ) ;                                                 /* type INTEGER */

       VAR X INIT ( LENGTH ( 6.5 ) ) ;                                    /* type LENGTH          */

1
 Recall from Chapter 2 that any predicate for which the corresponding set of parameters is empty is in fact a
proposition.
2
 As explained in Chapter 2, join degenerates to (relational) cartesian product if the operands have no attributes in
common. It follows that join always degenerates to cartesian product if either operand is DEE or DUM; thus, the join
we are talking about here (“the join of any relation r with TABLE_DEE”) is in fact a cartesian product.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     page 167
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                       Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      VAR P INIT ( POLAR ( LENGTH ( 1.0 ) ,       /* type POINT                   */
                           ANGLE ( 3.14159 / 4 ) ) ) ;

      VAR LS INIT ( LINESEG ( POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) , /* type LINESEG */
                    POINT ( 1.0, 1.0 ) ) )

      These examples notwithstanding, Tutorial D does permit a variable definition to include both
an explicit type declaration and an INIT specification, as in this example:
      VAR M INTEGER INIT ( 0 ) ;

In such a case, of course, the INIT expression must be of the type specified (INTEGER, in the
example).


RM PRESCRIPTION 12: TUPLE VARIABLES

D shall provide facilities for users to define tuple variables. Each tuple variable shall be named
and shall have a specified nonempty declared type of the form TUPLE H for some heading H. Let
variable V be of declared type TUPLEH; then the degree of that heading H shall be the degree of
V, and the attributes and corresponding types of that heading H shall be the attributes and
corresponding declared attribute types of V. For so long as variable V exists, it shall have a value
that is of type TUPLEH. Defining V shall have the effect of initializing V to some value—either a
value specified explicitly as part of the operation that defines V, or some implementation-defined
value if no such explicit value is specified.

                                     ———  ———

Again little further explanation seems to be needed, and we content ourselves with a few examples
(note the INIT specifications and inferred types in each case after the first):
      VAR PQ TUPLE { P# P#, QTY QTY } ;

      VAR PQX INIT ( TUPLE { P# P#('P1'), QTY QTY(600) } ) ;
                                  /* type TUPLE { P# P#, QTY QTY } */

      VAR ADDR INIT ( TUPLE { STREET '', CITY '', STATE '', ZIP '' } ) ;
              /* type TUPLE { STREET CHAR, CITY CHAR, STATE CHAR, ZIP CHAR } */

      VAR NADDR2 INIT ( TUPLE { NAME NAME(''),
                                ADDR TUPLE { STREET '', CITY '',
                                             STATE '', ZIP '' } } ) ;
                /* type TUPLE { NAME NAME,                            */
                /*              ADDR TUPLE { STREET CHAR, CITY CHAR,  */
                /*                           STATE CHAR, ZIP CHAR } } */

      VAR NADDRS2 INIT ( TUPLE { NAME NAME(''),
                                 ADDRS RELATION { STREET CHAR, CITY CHAR,
                                                  STATE CHAR, ZIP CHAR } { } } ) ;
                 /* type TUPLE { NAME NAME,                                */
                 /*              ADDRS RELATION { STREET CHAR, CITY CHAR,  */
                 /*                               STATE CHAR, ZIP CHAR } } */




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                 page 168
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                          Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


RM PRESCRIPTION 13: RELATION VARIABLES (RELVARS)

D shall provide facilities for users to define relation variables (relvars for short)—both database
relvars (i.e., relvars that are part of some database) and application relvars (i.e., relvars that are
local to some application). D shall also provide facilities for users to destroy database relvars.
Each relvar shall be named and shall have a specified declared type of the form RELATION H for
some heading H. Let variable V be of declared type RELATION H; then the degree of that heading
H shall be the degree of V, and the attributes and corresponding types of that heading H shall be
the attributes and corresponding declared attribute types of V. For so long as variable V exists, it
shall have a value that is of type RELATION H.

                                       ———  ———

Here by way of example are Tutorial D definitions (repeated from Chapter 2) for relvars S, P, and
SP from the suppliers-and-parts database:
       VAR S REAL RELATION { S# S#, SNAME NAME, STATUS INTEGER, CITY CHAR }
             KEY { S# } ;

       VAR P REAL RELATION
             { P# P#, PNAME NAME, COLOR COLOR, WEIGHT WEIGHT, CITY CHAR }
             KEY { P# } ;

       VAR SP REAL RELATION { S# S#, P# P#, QTY QTY }
              KEY { S#, P# } ;

       These definitions are more or less self-explanatory, except perhaps for (a) the REAL
specifications, which mean the relvars are real as opposed to virtual (see the paragraph immediately
following), and (b) the KEY specifications, which specify candidate keys (see RM Prescription 15).
Relvars S, P, and SP are now part of the database—i.e., the database catalog has been updated to
include entries describing them. In accordance with RM Prescription 14, moreover, each of those
relvars has as its initial value an empty relation (of the applicable type), since no other initial value
has been explicitly specified.
       Note: D supports both database and application relvars, but we defer detailed discussion of
the latter to the next section. Further, database relvars can be either real or virtual, but again we
defer detailed discussion of the latter to the next section—except to remind you that (as noted in
Chapter 2) real and virtual relvars are the Manifesto counterparts to what are commonly called base
tables and views, respectively.
       Here now is an example of destroying a relvar:
      DROP VAR SP ;

The specified relvar must be a database relvar (in Tutorial D terms, its definition must have
specified either REAL or VIRTUAL, not PRIVATE or PUBLIC).
      Although we do not prescribe such a thing, we do not mean to preclude the possibility that D
might usefully include some kind of “alter relvar” operator as a shorthand (analogous to ALTER
TABLE in SQL).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 169
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                      Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


       One last point to close this section (and it applies to relvars of all kinds, not just real ones):
Do not make the mistake of thinking that a relation variable is a set of tuple variables. A relation
variable is a variable whose permitted values are relation values; updating a relation variable
replaces the current relation value of that variable by another such value. There is no notion, nor
can there be any notion, that “updating a relation variable” really means updating some tuple
variable(s) within the relation variable in question. As explained in Chapter 2, we do sometimes
talk, very loosely, of “updating some tuple within some relvar” (from t to t', say), but all we mean
by such talk is that the “old” and “new” values of the relvar in question differ only inasmuch as the
old one includes t and the new one includes t' instead.


RM PRESCRIPTION 14: KINDS OF RELVARS

Database relvars shall be either real or virtual. A virtual relvar V shall be a database relvar whose
value at any given time is the result of evaluating a certain relational expression at that time; the
relational expression in question shall be specified when V is defined and shall mention at least one
database relvar. A real relvar shall be a database relvar that is not virtual. Defining a real relvar
V shall have the effect of initializing V to some value—either a value specified explicitly as part of
the operation that defines V, or an empty relation if no such explicit value is specified.
       Application relvars shall be either public or private. A public relvar shall be an application
relvar that constitutes the perception of the application in question of some portion of some
database. A private relvar shall be an application relvar that is completely private to the
application in question and is not part of any database. Defining a private relvar V shall have the
effect of initializing V to some value—either a value specified explicitly as part of the operation that
defines V, or an empty relation if no such explicit value is specified.

                                             ———  ———

Virtual Relvars

Database relvars are either real or virtual (“base tables or views”). Real relvars were discussed
under RM Prescription 13. Here by contrast are a couple of examples of virtual relvars:
         VAR PART_CITIES VIRTUAL
           ( P { P#, CITY } )    /* projection of parts on P# and CITY */
             KEY { P# } ;

         VAR COLOCATED VIRTUAL
           ( S JOIN P )        /* join of suppliers and parts on CITY */
             KEY { S#, P# } ;

       Relvars PART_CITIES and COLOCATED are now part of the database, in the sense that—
like the relvars S and P in terms of which they are defined1—they are now described by entries in
the database catalog. The value of each of these virtual relvars at time t is the value at time t of the

1
 We do not preclude the possibility of defining views of application relvars as well as database ones. For simplicity,
however, we assume throughout this book that all virtual relvars are database relvars specifically.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                    page 170
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                           Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


relational expression in terms of which it is defined. Note: If the KEY specifications were omitted,
the relvars would be considered to have whatever candidate keys could be inferred by the system
for their defining expressions (see RM Very Strong Suggestion 3 in Chapter 10).
       Now, it is well known (but still worth mentioning explicitly) that virtual relvars serve two
rather different purposes:

 1.   A user who actually defines a virtual relvar V is, obviously, aware of the expression X in terms
      of which V is defined. Such a user can use the name V wherever the expression X is intended,
      but such uses are basically just shorthand.

 2.   By contrast, a user who is merely informed that relvar V exists and is available for use is
      typically not aware of the defining expression X. To such a user, in fact, relvar V should
      ideally look and behave just like a real relvar. Of course, it is also well known that there are
      difficulties over updating virtual relvars; thus, it is unclear at the time of writing to what
      extent this objective can be achieved. We observe, however, that if any relvar turns out to be
      intrinsically nonupdatable, then we would not be justified in calling it a relvar—i.e., a
      variable—in the first place. See Appendix E for further discussion.

       We distinguish between these two cases when necessary by referring to them explicitly as
Case 1 and Case 2, respectively. Note in particular, however, that we do not make any distinctions
in this regard regarding updatability in particular—we intend Case 1 and Case 2 virtual relvars to be
exactly as updatable as each other.
       We observe further that, at least for Case 2, the decision as to which relvars should be
considered real and which virtual is to some degree arbitrary (we say “to some degree” because
database design theory sometimes has something to say on such matters). For example, let the
values of relvars A, B, and C at time t be a, b, and c, respectively. If it is true for all such times t
that a and b are projections of c and c is the join of a and b, then either (a) A and B could be real and
C virtual, or (b) C could be real and A and B virtual. It follows that there should be no arbitrary and
unnecessary distinctions between real and virtual relvars. We refer to this fact—or perhaps
objective would be a better word, given the uncertainties over updatability already mentioned—as
The Principle of Interchangeability (of real and virtual relvars).

Private Relvars

A private relvar is simply a local variable that happens to be a relvar; it is not part of the database
and has no entry in the catalog. For example:
      VAR PQ PRIVATE RELATION { P# P#, QTY QTY } KEY { P# } ;

Relvar PQ is initialized to the following empty relation:
      RELATION { P# P#, QTY QTY } { }




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 171
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                   Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


Public Relvars

Suppose application A accesses database relvar V directly by name (note that we do not prohibit
such a possibility, though we would not object if the implementation did so). Clearly, then,
application A is vulnerable to changes in the definition of V. In the interests of logical data
independence, therefore [86], we prescribe support for public relvars. A public relvar represents the
application’s perception of some portion of the database. For example:
         VAR ZS PUBLIC RELATION { S# S#, SNAME NAME, CITY CHAR } KEY { S# } ;

       This definition effectively asserts that “the application believes” there is a relvar in the
database called ZS, with attributes and key as specified. Such is not the case, of course—but there
is a database relvar called S (with attributes and key as specified for ZS but with one additional
attribute), and we can clearly define a mapping between them, thus:
         ZS   ≡   S { S#, SNAME, CITY }

      The right side of this mapping denotes the projection of S on S#, SNAME, and CITY. The
mapping is performed outside the application.1 Now if it ever becomes necessary to change the
definition of relvar S in any way, logical data independence can be preserved by changing the
mapping and not the application.
      The concept of public relvars allows us to draw a sharp distinction between the database as it
is known (a) to the system and (b) to the application. In other words, we maintain two sets of
definitions, one in the application and one in the catalog; the former represent the application’s
perception of the database and the latter represent the database “as it really is,” and maintaining the
mapping between the two is what enables us to achieve logical data independence.
      We close this subsection by pointing out that (as you might have realized already) public
relvars amount to little more than a slight variation on Case 2 virtual relvars. That is, a public relvar
can be thought of as a Case 2 virtual relvar, R say, except that:

    a.   The mapping of R to the relvar(s) in terms of which R is defined is specified not as part of the
         definition of R itself but, rather, somewhere external to that definition.
    b.   The structure of R is explicitly specified as part of the definition of R itself, instead of being
         inferred from that mapping.

In fact, Case 2 virtual relvars were always intended, like public relvars, to serve as a mechanism for
achieving logical data independence; unfortunately, however, the manner of their commercial
realization undermined that objective, at least in SQL. The problem with SQL views in this regard
is that an SQL view definition explicitly reveals the mapping information and so makes it difficult
to hide that information from the user—despite the fact that hiding that information is exactly what
needs to be done. (Indeed, the structural information, which the user does need to know about, is
not defined explicitly but is inferred from the mapping.) Thus, it would be possible to dispense with


1
  We leave details of the mapping process to implementers, though we observe that the language D might be used for
the purpose.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                page 172
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                    Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


the public relvar concept if the Case 2 virtual relvar concept were revised appropriately. We do not
propose any such revision here, however, for fear of introducing confusion—and so the criticisms
just articulated apply to our virtual relvars almost but not quite as much as they do to SQL views.
(We say “not quite” because we do at least allow integrity constraints to refer to virtual relvars.)

Relation Constants

Let V be a virtual relvar, and let X be the defining expression for V. As noted in Chapter 5, X must
not mention any variables other than database relvars (but it must mention at least one of those, for
otherwise it would have a constant value and V would not be a variable at all). As also noted in
Chapter 5, however, the ability to define relation constants or relcons might well be useful in
practice. For example (to invent some syntax on the fly):
       CONST PQ6 RELATION { TUPLE { P# P#('P1'), QTY QTY( 600) } ,
                            TUPLE { P# P#('P2'), QTY QTY(1000) } ,
                            TUPLE { P# P#('P3'), QTY QTY( 400) } ,
                            TUPLE { P# P#('P4'), QTY QTY( 500) } ,
                            TUPLE { P# P#('P5'), QTY QTY( 500) } ,
                            TUPLE { P# P#('P6'), QTY QTY( 100) } } ;

     Now, it might be objected that a virtual relvar V can have a constant value even if its defining
expression does mention at least one database relvar and no other variables. For example:
       VAR NO_SUPPLIERS VIRTUAL ( S WHERE FALSE ) ;

      This relvar is always empty (INSERTs will always fail unless the set of tuples to be inserted is
empty), and thus it certainly has a constant value. But this state of affairs is not really different in
kind from one in which the relvar is real but subject to a certain constraint:
       VAR R REAL ... ;

       CONSTRAINT R_IS_EMPTY ( IS_EMPTY ( R ) ) ;

       Like R in this example, NO_SUPPLIERS is not intrinsically nonupdatable—in both cases, it
is just that the existence of a certain constraint implies that certain updates (not all) will fail.1 To be
more specific, both relvars are subject to the constraint “for all tuples in the relvar, FALSE,” which
evaluates to TRUE if and only if the relvar is empty. See Appendix E for further explanation.
       It might also be objected that a virtual relvar V can have different values at different times
even if its defining expression fails to mention any database relvars at all. For example:
       VAR TODAY VIRTUAL ( RELATION { TUPLE { D CURRENT_DATE ( ) } } ) ;

      We are assuming here that CURRENT_DATE is a niladic built-in operator that returns “the
date today”; in effect, it is a kind of system variable (and the defining expression for TODAY thus
does mention a variable, albeit not a database relvar). While it might be useful to support some


1
 In fact, the virtual relvar NO_SUPPLIERS seems to be logically indistinguishable from a real relvar defined to be
SAME_TYPE_AS(S) and subject to the constraint that it must be empty.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                  page 173
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                          Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


such functionality, we feel that such considerations are secondary to our main purpose. We also
feel that to use the terminology of virtual relvars in connection with such functionality is to muddy
an otherwise clear picture (virtual relvars were always intended to provide views of the database
specifically). Note in particular that it makes little sense to attempt to apply explicit updates to a
“relvar” like TODAY.


RM PRESCRIPTION 15: CANDIDATE KEYS

By definition, every relvar shall have at least one candidate key. At least one such key shall be
defined, either explicitly or implicitly, at the time the relvar in question is defined, and it shall not
be possible to destroy all of the candidate keys of a given relvar (other than by destroying the relvar
itself).

                                       ———  ———

We discussed candidate keys (keys for short) and gave a precise definition of the concept in Chapter
2. Here we just give a few self-explanatory examples of relvars with two or more keys (we have
already seen several examples of relvars with just one):
       VAR TAX_BRACKET REAL RELATION { LOW         MONEY,
                                        HIGH       MONEY,
                                        PERCENTAGE RATIONAL }
                            KEY { LOW }
                            KEY { HIGH }
                            KEY { PERCENTAGE } ;

       VAR ROSTER REAL RELATION { DAY DAY, HOUR HOUR, GATE                    GATE, PILOT NAME }
                            KEY { DAY, HOUR, GATE }
                            KEY { DAY, HOUR, PILOT } ;

       VAR MARRIAGE REAL RELATION { SPOUSE_A         NAME,
                                    SPOUSE_B          NAME,
                                    DATE_OF_MARRIAGE DATE }
       /* assume no polygamy and no couple marrying each other more than once ... */
                         KEY { SPOUSE_A, DATE_OF_MARRIAGE }
                         KEY { DATE_OF_MARRIAGE, SPOUSE_B }
                         KEY { SPOUSE_B, SPOUSE_A } ;

      Note: As we know, every relvar has at least one key. In the case of a virtual relvar, explicit
specification of such keys is optional, because (as mentioned under RM Prescription 14) the system
should be able to infer them for itself. In other cases, at least one key must be specified explicitly at
the time the relvar is defined—unless, again, the system is able to infer such keys for itself, as it can
in Tutorial D, for example, if SAME_TYPE_AS is used in the relvar definition (see Chapter 5).


RM PRESCRIPTION 16: DATABASES

A database shall be a named container for relvars; the content of a given database at any given
time shall be a set of database relvars. The necessary operators for defining and destroying




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 174
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                       Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


databases shall not be part of D (in other words, defining and destroying databases shall be done
“outside the D environment”).

                                     ———  ———

A database as we use the term is a purely logical concept; how it maps to physical storage is
implementation defined. In the extreme case, a single D database could be physically distributed
across any number of disparate computers, running any number of disparate DBMSs, at any number
of mutually remote sites. We have two major reasons for wanting to include such a concept in the
Manifesto:

 ■    To draw a boundary between data that is persistent and data that is not

 ■    To draw a boundary between data that is accessible to a given transaction and data that is not

       First, regarding persistence: Databases (and nothing else) are persistent, meaning, loosely,
that their lifetime is greater than that of a typical transaction or application execution. More
precisely, once an update has been applied to a database and committed, that update is guaranteed
never to be rolled back (except possibly as noted under OO Prescription 5 in Chapter 8). Note
carefully, therefore, that since the only kind of variable we permit within a database is, very
specifically, the database relvar, the only kind of variable that might possess the property of
persistence is such a relvar. Thus, we do not subscribe to the object-world dictum “persistence
orthogonal to type”—see, e.g., references [2], [3], and [130]—for reasons explained in detail in
references [57] and [65]. (It might help to point out that “persistence orthogonal to type” is
effectively the direct opposite of The Information Principle.)
       Second, regarding accessibility: Any given transaction is defined to interact with exactly one
database, meaning that (a) every database relvar accessed by that transaction belongs to the same
database, and therefore that (b) every database relvar mentioned within a given relational expression
belongs to the same database (see RM Prescriptions 17 and 18). Thus, if database DB is the
database associated with transaction TX, then TX must not mention any relvar R that belongs to
some distinct database DB' and not to database DB.
       Incidentally, it follows from the foregoing that database relvar names must be unique within
their containing database. This is one reason why we insist that defining and destroying databases
be done “outside the D environment”—for if not, we would need a scope within which database
names were unique, which would simply push the issue of name uniqueness out to another level. In
practice, of course, defining and destroying databases will presumably be done by means of some
kind of system-provided utilities (and the user might even think of those utilities, harmlessly, as
being part of the overall “D environment”).
       We do not prescribe a mechanism for making and breaking the necessary connections
between transactions and databases. In practice, such operations will presumably be performed by
means of some kind of CONNECT and DISCONNECT statements. The reason we do not prescribe
any such mechanism is simply that, in practice, such mechanisms involve far too many concepts—
clients, servers, processes, sessions, “DBMS instances,” and many other things—that are beyond
the purview of the Manifesto as such.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                  page 175
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


RM PRESCRIPTION 17: TRANSACTIONS

Each transaction shall interact with exactly one database. However, distinct transactions shall be
able to interact with distinct databases, and distinct databases shall not necessarily be disjoint.
Also, D shall provide facilities for a transaction to define new relvars, or destroy existing ones,
within its associated database (see RM Prescription 13). [More text later added here]

                                      ———  ———

This prescription needs no elaboration here.


RM PRESCRIPTION 18: RELATIONAL ALGEBRA

D shall support the usual operators of the relational algebra (or some logical equivalent thereof).
Specifically, it shall support, directly or indirectly, at least the operators RENAME, restrict
(WHERE), project, JOIN, UNION, INTERSECT, MINUS, DIVIDEBY, EXTEND, SUMMARIZE,
GROUP, and UNGROUP. All such operators shall be expressible without excessive
circumlocution. D shall support type inference for relation types, whereby the type of the result of
evaluating an arbitrary relational expression shall be well defined and known to both the system
and the user.

                                      ———  ———

All of the operators mentioned in this prescription were defined in Chapter 2, with the sole
exception of DIVIDEBY. We will explain that operator in detail in just a moment; first, however,
we offer a few comments on certain other aspects of this prescription.

 ■    As noted in Chapter 2, the operators of the relational algebra are generic, in the sense that they
      work for all relations, loosely speaking. They are generic precisely because they are
      associated with a certain type generator—viz., RELATION—and not with some specific type:
      neither a specific scalar type such as INTEGER or ELLIPSE, nor a specific nonscalar type
      such as some particular tuple or relation type. Contrast the situation with user-defined
      operators, relational or otherwise, in Tutorial D, where parameters are defined to be of
      certain specific types and corresponding arguments are required to be of those exact same
      types.

 ■    The prescription requires that the operators “be expressible without excessive
      circumlocution.” Now, we realize this requirement is not very precise as it stands, but it is
      difficult to make it more so. We mean it to imply among other things that:

      ●   Existential and universal quantification (loosely, EXISTS and FORALL) should be
          equally easy to express. By way of a trivial example, consider the natural language
          queries “Get suppliers who supply part P1” and “Get suppliers who do not supply part
          P1.” Note that these two queries do conceptually involve EXISTS and FORALL,
          respectively—the first effectively means “Get suppliers such that there exists a




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 176
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                           Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


               corresponding shipment where the part number is P1” and the second “Get suppliers such
               that for all corresponding shipments the part number is not P1.” Here are possible
               Tutorial D formulations of these queries:
               S MATCHING ( SP WHERE P# = P#('P1') )

               S NOT MATCHING ( SP WHERE P# = P#('P1') )

               Loosely speaking, these two expressions return suppliers S1 and S2 and suppliers S3, S4,
               and S5, respectively, given our usual sample data.

         ●     Projection over specified attributes and projection over all but specified attributes should
               be equally easy to express. Here by way of example are Tutorial D formulations of the
               queries “Get supplier number for all suppliers” and “Get all but supplier number for all
               suppliers”:
               S { S# }

               S { ALL BUT S# }

    ■    Of course, RM Prescription 18 does not prohibit support for additional relational operators.
         Tutorial D in particular includes support for SEMIJOIN (or MATCHING), SEMIMINUS (or
         NOT MATCHING), D_UNION, COMPOSE, WRAP/UNWRAP, substitute (UPDATE),
         TCLOSE (see RM Prescription 19), and n-adic (prefix) versions of UNION, D_UNION,
         INTERSECT, and JOIN.

    ■    The prescribed support for relation type inference was discussed in Chapters 2 and 3.

DIVIDEBY [dropped in Tutorial D Version 2]

DIVIDEBY is a generalized version of Codd’s original divide operator [22]. Codd’s divide
required the divisor and dividend to be such that the heading of the divisor was a proper subset of
that of the dividend. Subsequently, Todd [133] introduced an extended form of divide that applied
to any pair of relations whatsoever.1 Unfortunately, both of these operators suffered from certain
problems over empty relations; moreover, it turned out that Todd’s divide was in fact not exactly an
extended form of Codd’s—they were really two different operators. In reference [34], therefore, the
present writers proposed (a) a generalized version of Codd’s divide (“the Small Divide”) and (b) a
generalized version of Todd’s divide (“the Great Divide”) that overcame the difficulties with empty
relations. We now explain these operators, with examples, starting with the Small Divide.
       Consider the query “Get suppliers who supply every purple part” (the point of the example
being that, given our usual sample data, the set of purple parts is empty). Using Codd’s divide,
then, we might write:
         SP { S#, P# } DIVIDEBY ( P WHERE COLOR = COLOR('Purple') ) { P# }



1
    Except that, as in (e.g.) join, attributes with the same name in the two relations had to be of the same typ




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        page 177
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                        Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


This expression is shorthand for the following:
      WITH ( P WHERE COLOR = COLOR('Purple') ) AS PP ,
           ( SP { S# } JOIN PP { P# } ) AS QQ ,
           ( QQ MINUS SP { S#, P# } ) AS RR :
      SP { S# } MINUS RR { S# }

      But this expression misses suppliers who supply no parts at all—even though (logically
speaking) such a supplier does supply every purple part, because, as is well known, “FORALL x
(exp)” always evaluates to TRUE if there are no x’s, regardless of what the boolean expression exp
happens to be. By contrast, the following expression (which involves a Small Divide) is guaranteed
to give the right answer in all cases:
      WITH ( P WHERE COLOR = COLOR('Purple') ) AS PP :
      S { S# } DIVIDEBY PP { P# } PER ( SP { S#, P# } )

This expression is defined to be shorthand for the following:
       WITH ( P WHERE COLOR = COLOR('Purple') ) AS PP ,
            ( S { S# } JOIN PP { P# } ) AS QQ ,
            ( QQ MINUS SP { S#, P# } ) AS RR :
       S { S# } MINUS RR { S# }

This latter expression differs from the Codd expansion in that the second line refers to S instead of
SP; it therefore extracts supplier numbers from S, not SP, and in particular it does return supplier
numbers for suppliers who supply no parts at all.
       Now, we made a tacit assumption in the foregoing Small Divide that the dividend and the
divisor have disjoint headings—dend and dor, say—and the PER relation has a heading—per,
say—that is the union of dend and dor. But it is a simple matter to extend the definition to allow
dend, dor, and per to be any headings whatsoever, thereby permitting the example to be simplified
to just:
      WITH ( P WHERE COLOR = COLOR('Purple') ) AS PP :
      S DIVIDEBY PP PER ( SP )

Since (a) the only common attribute for S and SP is S# and (b) the only common attribute for SP
and PP is P#, this expression can easily be defined in such a way as to be semantically equivalent to
the earlier version.
      We turn now to the Great Divide. Suppose we are given an extended version of the suppliers-
and-parts database that looks like this (in outline):
      S    { S#, ... }
      SP   { S#, P# }                          /* ignore QTY for simplicity */
      P    { P#, ..., COLOR, ... }
      PJ   { P#, J# }
      J    { J#, ... }

      “J” here stands for “projects,” and relvar PJ indicates which parts are used in which projects.
Now consider the query “Get S#/J# pairs such that supplier S# supplies all red parts used in project
J#.” Let RPJ stand for the expression:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   page 178
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      ( PJ JOIN ( P WHERE COLOR = COLOR('Red') ) )

Using Todd’s divide, then, we might write:
      SP { S#, P# } DIVIDEBY RPJ { P#, J# }

This expression is defined to yield a relation with heading {S#,J#} and with body consisting of all
tuples <s,j> such that a tuple <s,p> appears in SP for all tuples <p,j> appearing in PJ. Note: We
deliberately depart from our formal notation for tuples here, for simplicity.
      It should not be necessary to go into great detail to persuade you that, like Codd’s divide,
Todd’s divide suffers from problems—worse problems, in fact—over empty relations. For
example, the expression shown above misses <s,j> tuples where (a) project j uses no red parts or (b)
supplier s supplies no parts and there happen to be no red parts. By contrast, the following
expression is guaranteed to give the right answer in all cases:
      S { S# } DIVIDEBY J { J# } PER ( SP { S#, P# }, RPJ { P#, J# } )

This expression is defined to be shorthand for the following:
       ( S { S# } JOIN J { J# } )
           MINUS ( ( S { S# } JOIN RPJ { P#, J# } )
                     MINUS ( SP { S#, P# }
                             JOIN RPJ { P#, J# } ) ) { S#, J# }

       Converting this expression into an equivalent step-at-a-time version using WITH and
introduced names is left as an exercise for the reader. Note, however, that again we have made a
tacit assumption—this time to the effect that the dividend and the divisor have disjoint headings
dend and dor, say, and the PER relations have headings per1 and per2, say, such that dend is the
difference between per1 and per2 (in that order) and dor is the difference between per2 and per1 (in
that order). Again, however, it is a simple matter to extend the definition to allow dend, dor, per1,
and per2 to be any headings whatosover, thereby permitting the foregoing example to be simplified
to just:
      S DIVIDEBY J PER ( SP, RPJ )

      Since (a) the only common attribute for S and SP is S#, (b) the only common attribute for SP
and RPJ is P#, and (c) the only common attribute for RPJ and J is J#, this expression can easily be
defined in such a way as to be semantically equivalent to the earlier version.
      Incidentally, observe the effect if the operand ordering is altered thus:
      J DIVIDEBY S PER ( RPJ, SP )

This expression yields <j,s> tuples such that project j uses all red parts supplied by supplier s.
      We now observe that expressions involving DIVIDEBY (either version) can always be
replaced by logically simpler—though sometimes lengthier—expressions involving relation
comparisons instead (see RM Prescription 22). For example, here is another formulation of the
query “Get suppliers who supply every purple part”:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   page 179
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      S WHERE ( ( SP RENAME ( S# AS X ) ) WHERE X = S# ) { P# } 
                ( P WHERE COLOR = COLOR('Purple') ) { P# }

      Explanation: For a given supplier, identified by the S# value from some tuple t in relvar S,
the expression
      ( ( SP RENAME ( S# AS X ) ) WHERE X = S# ) { P# }

yields the set of part numbers for parts shown in relvar SP as currently being supplied by that
supplier. That set of part numbers is then compared with the set of part numbers currently
appearing in relvar P for purple parts. If and only if the two sets are equal, then that tuple t from
relvar S is included in the result. (We have omitted the final projection over supplier numbers for
simplicity, since it would probably not be wanted in practice anyway.)
      We also show an alternative formulation of the same query (still involving a relational
comparison, but avoiding the use of RENAME) in order to illustrate another point:
      S WHERE ( ( SP JOIN RELATION { TUPLE { S# S# } } ) { P# } 
                ( P WHERE COLOR = COLOR('Purple') ) { P# }
      Explanation: For a given supplier, identified by the S# value from some tuple t in relvar S,
the expression
      SP JOIN RELATION { TUPLE { S# S# } }
yields the set of shipments currently appearing in relvar SP for that supplier (the second S# in the
expression as written is a reference to the S# attribute of relvar S). The rest of the explanation is as
before.
      We close this section with a somewhat embarrassing admission. The fact is, we have
belatedly realized that our own language Tutorial D fails to satisfy one of our declared principles of
good language design! The principle in question is known as similarity [6] or syntactic consistency
[31] (see RM Prescription 26), and the failure concerns the syntax for <divide> and <summarize>.
These constructs both make use of a construct called <per>, and they do so for similar purposes.
But a certain cognitive dissonance between them can be observed, which we now explain.
      Consider first the use of <per> in <summarize>, as in the following example (“For each
supplier, get a count of the number of parts supplied by that supplier”):
      SUMMARIZE SP PER ( S { S# } ) ADD ( COUNT ( ) AS NO_OF_PARTS )

Compare this expression with our earlier example of a Small Divide (“Get suppliers who supply
every purple part”):
       WITH ( P WHERE COLOR = COLOR('Purple') ) AS PP :
       S { S# } DIVIDEBY PP { P# } PER ( SP { S#, P# } )

       In the <summarize> example, the “PER relation” gives supplier numbers of the suppliers we
are interested in, while what we might call the primary operand, SP, gives the information we seek
regarding those suppliers. In the <divide> example, by contrast, one of the primary operands—the
dividend, S{S#}—gives supplier numbers of the suppliers we are interested in, while the divisor,
PP{P#}, gives part numbers of the parts we are interested in and the “PER relation” gives the
information we seek regarding those suppliers and those parts.



Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 180
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                          Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      The <summarize> syntax looks right: The relation to be summarized is indeed (the current
value of) SP and not S{S#}. It seems, therefore, that our mistake is in the syntax of <divide>. To
be consistent with <summarize>, our Small Divide example should look like this:
      WITH ( P WHERE COLOR = COLOR('Purple') ) AS PP :
      SP { S#, P# } DIVIDEBY PP { P# } PER ( S { S# } )

       Here the dividend and the “PER relation” have been interchanged; in other words, the “PER
relation” gives the suppliers we are interested in, the divisor gives the parts we are interested in, and
the dividend gives the information we need about those suppliers and parts.
       Similarly, our example of a Great Divide—
      S { S# } DIVIDEBY J { J# } PER ( SP { S#, P# }, RPJ { P#, J# } )

—would look better like this:
      SP { S#, P# } DIVIDEBY RPJ { P#, J# } PER ( S { S# } , J { J# } )

       Here the two “PER relations” give the suppliers and projects we are interested in, and the
dividend and divisor give the shipment and usage information we need about those suppliers and
projects.
       This change to our syntax for <divide>, if implemented, would have the following
satisfactory effect: For both the Small Divide and the Great Divide, the heading of the result would
be the union of the headings of the dividend and divisor, minus the common attributes. It is not so
easy to determine an analogous rule with reference to the actual Tutorial D syntax.
       We offer this lamentable failure on our part as an object lesson to language designers
everywhere. We spare you the details of how it happened ... Suffice it to say that language design is
hard.


RM PRESCRIPTION 19: RELVAR NAMES, RELATION SELECTORS, AND
RECURSION

Relvar names and relation selector invocations shall both be valid relational expressions.
Recursion shall be permitted in relational expressions.

                                       ———  ———

In Tutorial D, relvar names and relation selector invocations are indeed both valid relational
expressions. First, the expression R, where R is a relvar name, serves as a (relation) variable
reference; it denotes the value of relvar R at the time in question. Second, relation selector
invocations were discussed under RM Prescriptions 7 and 10; we have seen several examples
already, both in this chapter and in Chapter 2, but here are a couple more:
      RELATION { S# S#, P# P#, QTY QTY }
               { TUPLE { S# SX, P# PX, QTY QX * 3 } ,
                 TUPLE { S# SY, P# PY, QTY QY * 7 } }




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 181
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                        Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      This expression takes the overall form:
      RELATION <heading> <body>

The <heading> is { S# S#, P# P#, QTY QTY }, while the body in turn takes the form:
      { <tuple exp commalist> }

In the example, the commalist contains two <tuple exp>s, each of which is in fact a tuple selector
invocation. Note: Actually, the <heading> in the foregoing example could safely be omitted
because it is implied by the declared type of the two tuple selector invocations. The example could
thus be simplified to just:
      RELATION { TUPLE { S# SX, P# PX, QTY QX * 3 } ,
                 TUPLE { S# SY, P# PY, QTY QY * 7 }

      By way of another example, recall from Chapter 5 that Tutorial D supports the two built-in
“relcons” TABLE_DEE and TABLE_DUM. These names stand for the relation selector
invocations
      RELATION { } { TUPLE { } }

and
      RELATION { } { }

(respectively). In each case, the first pair of braces denotes an empty heading; it can be omitted
from the TABLE_DEE expansion, but not from the TABLE_DUM expansion (why not?). See the
discussion of RM Prescription 10 for further explanation.
       Turning now to recursion: First of all, Tutorial D includes direct support for the transitive
closure operator TCLOSE, whose definition is inherently recursive. Consider the bill-of-materials
relation MM shown in Fig. 6.1. That relation is an example of what is sometimes called a digraph
relation, because it can be represented as a graph of nodes and directed arcs (see Fig. 6.2).
╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                ┌──────────┬────┬──────────┬────┐                ║
║             MM │ MAJOR_P# : P# │ MINOR_P# : P# │                ║
║                ├══════════╧════┼══════════╧════┤                ║
║                │ P1            │ P2            │                ║
║                │ P1            │ P3            │                ║
║                │ P2            │ P3            │                ║
║                │ P2            │ P4            │                ║
║                │ P3            │ P5            │                ║
║                │ P4            │ P6            │                ║
║                └───────────────┴───────────────┘                ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 6.1: Relation MM




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                  page 182
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                                                                 ║
║                                part P1                          ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║               part P2                                           ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║               part P4                          part P3          ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║               part P6                                           ║
                                                 part P5
║                                                                 ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 6.2: Graph of relation MM

      Note: It is sometimes more convenient from an intuitive point of view to convert a digraph
such as that of Fig. 6.2 into a pure hierarchy with possibly repeated nodes. Fig. 6.3 shows a
hierarchic version of the digraph of Fig. 6.2.
╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                                                                 ║
║                                part P1                          ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║               part P2                          part P3          ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║     part P3            part P4                 part P5          ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║     part P5            part P6                                  ║
║                                                                 ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 6.3: Graph of relation MM as a hierarchy

       Now, since MM has exactly two attributes both of the same type, we can apply the transitive
closure operation to it. Here is a definition of that operation (an alternative to the one already given
in Chapter 2). Let r be a binary relation with attributes X and Y, both of the same type T. Then the
transitive closure of r, TCLOSE r, is a relation r+ with heading the same as that of r and body a
superset of that of r, defined as follows: The tuple {<X,T,x>,<Y,T,y>} appears in r+ if and only if it
appears in r or there exists a value z of type T such that the tuple {<X,T,x>,<Y,T,z>} appears in r
and the tuple {<X,T,z>,<Y,T,y>} appears in r+. (In other words, the “<x,y>“ tuple appears in r+ only
if there is a path in the graph from node x to node y, loosely speaking.) Fig. 6.4 shows the transitive
closure of relation MM.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 183
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                        Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                ┌──────────┬────┬──────────┬────┐                ║
║                │ MAJOR_P# : P# │ MINOR_P# : P# │                ║
║                ├══════════╧════┼══════════╧════┤                ║
║                │ P1            │ P2            │                ║
║                │ P1            │ P3            │                ║
║                │ P2            │ P3            │                ║
║                │ P2            │ P4            │                ║
║                │ P3            │ P5            │                ║
║                │ P4            │ P6            │                ║
║                │ P1            │ P4            │                ║
║                │ P1            │ P5            │                ║
║                │ P1            │ P6            │                ║
║                │ P2            │ P5            │                ║
║                │ P2            │ P6            │                ║
║                └───────────────┴───────────────┘                ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 6.4: Transitive closure of MM

       TCLOSE is important in connection with the part explosion problem—i.e., the problem of
finding all components, at all levels, of some specified part—and similar “recursive query”
applications.
       Tutorial D also includes the ability for users to define recursive operators of their own. Here
is an example:
      OPERATOR TRANCLO ( XY RELATION { X P#, Y P# } )
                        RETURNS RELATION { X P#, Y P# } ;
          RETURN
            ( WITH ( XY UNION ( ( XY RENAME ( Y AS Z ) ) COMPOSE
                                ( XY RENAME ( X AS Z ) ) ) ) AS TTT :
              IF TTT = XY THEN TTT          /* unwind recursion     */
                 ELSE TRANCLO ( TTT )       /* recursive invocation */
              END IF ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

       Operator TRANCLO takes a relational parameter and returns a relational result. Now let
relation MM be as shown in Fig. 6.1. Then the expression
      ( TRANCLO ( MM RENAME ( MAJOR_P# AS X , MINOR_P# AS Y ) ) )
                     RENAME ( X AS MAJOR_P# , Y AS MINOR_P# )

returns the result shown in Fig. 6.4 without using the built-in operator TCLOSE. (We make no
claim that TRANCLO is very efficient, but it can surely be improved in this regard.)
       We close this discussion of recursion by pointing out that we could if we wanted define the
transitive closure of MM as a virtual relvar, using either TCLOSE—
      VAR MMTC VIRTUAL ( TCLOSE ( MM ) ) ;

—or TRANCLO:
      VAR MMTC VIRTUAL
      ( ( TRANCLO ( MM RENAME ( MAJOR_P# AS X , MINOR_P# AS Y ) ) )
                       RENAME ( X AS MAJOR_P# , Y AS MINOR_P# ) ) ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   page 184
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


RM PRESCRIPTION 20: USER-DEFINED TUPLE AND RELATIONAL OPERATORS

D shall provide facilities for users to define and destroy their own tuple operators (user-defined
tuple operators) and relational operators (user-defined relational operators). Paragraphs a.-c.
from RM Prescription 3 shall apply, mutatis mutandis. [More text later added here]

                                      ———  ———

For simplicity we concentrate in what follows on relational operators specifically, but many of the
points apply to tuple operators equally well, mutatis mutandis.
      A relational operator is an operator that, when invoked, returns a relation value. RM
Prescription 18 requires support for certain built-in relational operators; the present prescription
additionally requires users to be able to define their own. Note, however, that the built-in operators
are generic while user-defined ones are not (but see RM Very Strong Suggestion 7 in Chapter 10).
      One example of a user-defined relational operator, TRANCLO, was discussed in the previous
section. Here is another (and simpler) example:
      OPERATOR PQO () RETURNS RELATION { P# P#, TOTQ QTY } ;
         RETURN ( SUMMARIZE SP PER ( P { P# } )
                               ADD ( SUM ( QTY ) AS TOTQ ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

This operator has no parameters, so an invocation looks like this:
      PQO ()

      Here is a moderately complicated example of a relational expression involving two PQO
invocations (“Get pairs of part numbers, px and py say, such that the total quantity for px is greater
than that for py”):
      ( ( ( PQO () RENAME ( P# AS PX, TOTQ AS TQX ) )
            JOIN
          ( PQO () RENAME ( P# AS PY, TOTQ AS TQY ) ) )
            WHERE TQX > TQY ) { PX, PY }

      Here now is an example of a parameterized user-defined relational operator:
      OPERATOR TQP ( PZ P# ) RETURNS RELATION { TOTQ QTY } ;
          RETURN ( ( PQO () WHERE P# = PZ ) { TOTQ } ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

Observe that operator TQP invokes the previously defined operator PQO. Here is an example of its
use:
      VAR P1_TOTQ QTY ;
      P1_TOTQ := TOTQ FROM ( TUPLE FROM ( TQP ( P#('P1') ) ) ) ;

A run-time error will occur if the expression following TUPLE FROM returns a relation of
cardinality anything other than one.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 185
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                       Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      We remark in passing that operator PQO, since it involves no parameters, could logically be
replaced by a virtual relvar, thus:
      VAR PQO VIRTUAL ( SUMMARIZE SP PER ( P { P# } ) ADD ( SUM ( QTY ) AS TOTQ ) ) ;

(We do not mean to suggest by these remarks that the expression PQO() should be allowed to
appear in a relational target position, however.) By contrast, operator TQP is not equivalent to any
virtual relvar.
      Finally, here is an example of destroying a user-defined relational operator:
      DROP OPERATOR TQP ;


RM PRESCRIPTION 21: ASSIGNMENTS

D shall support the assignment operator “:=” for every type T. The assignment shall be referred
to as a scalar, tuple, or relation (or relational) assignment according as T is a scalar, tuple, or
relation type. Let V and v be a variable and a value, respectively, of the same type. After
assignment of v to V, the equality comparison V = v shall evaluate to TRUE (see RM Prescription
8). Furthermore, all variables other than V shall remain unchanged, apart possibly from variables
defined in terms of V or variables in terms of which V is defined or both.
      D shall also support a multiple form of assignment, in which several individual assignments
shall be performed as a single operation. Let MA be the multiple assignment
      A1 , A2 , ... , An ;

(where A1, A2, ..., An are individual assignments, each assigning to exactly one target variable,
and the semicolon marks the overall end of the operation). Then the semantics of MA shall be
defined by the following pseudocode (Steps a.-d.):

 a.   For i := 1 to n, expand any syntactic shorthands involved in Ai. After all such expansions, let
      MA take the form
      V1 := X1 , V2 := X2 , ... , Vz := Xz ;

      for some z  n, where Vi is the name of some variable not defined in terms of any others and
      Xi is an expression of declared type the same as that of Vi.

 b.   Let p and q (1  p < q  z) be such that Vp and Vq are identical and there is no r (r < p or p
      < r < q) such that Vp and Vr are identical. Replace Aq in MA by an assignment of the form
      Vq := WITH Xp AS Vq : Xq

      and remove Ap from MA. Repeat this process until no such pair p and q remains. Let MA
      now consist of the sequence
      U1 := Y1 , U2 := Y2 , ... , Um := Ym ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                  page 186
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                          Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      where each Ui is some Vj (1  i  j  m  z).

 c.   For i := 1 to m, evaluate Yi. Let the result be yi.

 d.   For i := 1 to m, assign yi to Ui.

      Note: Step b. of the foregoing pseudocode makes use of the WITH construct of Tutorial D.
For further explanation, see Chapter 5.

                                      ———  ———

Of course, we have seen many examples of assignment in this book already. However, there is
quite a lot more to be said on the subject:

 ■    First of all, we remind you yet again that assignment is the only update operator we need,
      logically speaking. For this reason, assignment is the only update operator actually prescribed
      by the Manifesto. But additional update operators, either system or user defined, are of course
      not precluded. (We remind you too that assignment itself is required only because of our
      assumption, discussed in Chapter 1, that D is imperative in style.)

 ■    RM Prescription 21 requires that after assignment of the value v to the variable V, the
      comparison V = v must give TRUE. Of course, this requirement is effectively just a definition
      of what it means to assign v to V; as mentioned in Chapter 3, we refer to it as The Assignment
      Principle. Note that the principle applies to views (i.e., virtual relvars) in particular. For
      example, let LS be “suppliers in London”:
      VAR LS VIRTUAL ( S WHERE CITY = 'London' ) ;

      Then the following INSERT on LS will fail:
      INSERT LS RELATION { TUPLE { S# S#('S6'), SNAME NAME('Lopez'),
                                   STATUS 30, CITY 'Madrid' } } ;

      Observe that the INSERT fails, and the database remains unchanged, even though it would
      clearly be possible “to insert the new tuple” into the underlying real relvar S. The trouble is,
      that new tuple would not appear in the target relvar LS, and we would be faced with a
      violation of The Assignment Principle. Note: In fact, an SQL version of the example might
      “succeed” by doing exactly that—i.e., violating The Assignment Principle [41,99].

 ■    Recall from RM Prescription 3 that assignment (“:=”) is overloaded, in the sense that
      assigning v to V, where v and V are of the same type T, is supported for all types T. In fact,
      we do not preclude the possibility of allowing v and V to be of different types (thereby
      supporting assignment of, e.g., an integer value to a rational variable, or a U.S. dollar value to
      a U.K. sterling variable); in other words, we do not preclude the possibility of overloading
      “:=” still further. Tutorial D, however, assumes that the operator is not further overloaded in
      this way, but instead requires its operands always to be of the same type.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 187
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                      Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


 ■   Recall from RM Prescriptions 7 and 6, respectively, that Tutorial D supports the familiar
     INSERT, DELETE, and UPDATE operators as shorthand for certain relational assignments,
     and a tuple UPDATE operator as shorthand for a certain tuple assignment. In fact, it also
     supports a scalar UPDATE operator as shorthand for a certain scalar assignment. Here is an
     example:
     TYPE ELLIPSE POSSREP { A LENGTH, B LENGTH, CTR POINT
                            CONSTRAINT A  B } ;

     VAR E ELLIPSE ;

     UPDATE E ( B := LENGTH ( 3.0 ) ) ;

     The UPDATE statement here is shorthand for the following scalar assignment:
     E := ELLIPSE ( THE_A ( E ), LENGTH ( 3.0 ), THE_CTR ( E ) ) ;

     We will have more to say regarding this scalar UPDATE operator under RM Prescription 23.

Multiple Assignment

RM Prescription 21 also requires support for multiple assignment (and we occasionally refer to the
conventional assignment operator as single assignment, for emphasis). In effect, multiple
assignment allows us to carry out several presumably interrelated single assignments as an atomic
operation, without any integrity checking being done until all of the assignments in question have
been executed. For example, suppose that—for some strange reason—relvar S is subject to the
constraint that suppliers S2 and S3 must have total status 40. Given our usual sample data values,
then, each of the following single assignments will fail (we use the UPDATE shorthand for
convenience):
     UPDATE S WHERE S# = S#('S2') ( STATUS := 15 ) ;

     UPDATE S WHERE S# = S#('S3') ( STATUS := 25 ) ;

But the following multiple assignment will succeed (again we use the UPDATE shorthand; note
that the two component assignments are separated by a comma, not a semicolon, and are thereby
bundled into a single operation):
     UPDATE S WHERE S# = S#('S2') ( STATUS := 15 ) ,
     UPDATE S WHERE S# = S#('S3') ( STATUS := 25 ) ;

       The foregoing example shows multiple assignment on a single target relvar. Here by contrast
is an example with two distinct targets (and this time we use the DELETE shorthand):




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                page 188
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                       Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


         DELETE SP WHERE S# = S#('S1') , DELETE S                       WHERE S# = S#('S1') ;

       RM Prescription 21 includes a precise definition of the semantics of multiple assignment.1
The basic idea is that, first, all of the source expressions are evaluated; second, the constituent
single assignments are executed in sequence. Now, the reason all of the source expressions are
evaluated first is basically to ensure that the constituent assignments are all independent of one
another, in the sense that none of them depends on the result of any of the others. However, a
complication arises if two or more of those constituent assignments involve the same target variable
(a state of affairs that is not an error, please note—sometimes we do explicitly want the same target
variable to appear more than once). Indeed, the “double UPDATE” example already discussed—
         UPDATE S WHERE S# = S#('S2') ( STATUS := 15 ) ,
         UPDATE S WHERE S# = S#('S3') ( STATUS := 25 ) ;

—is a case in point. Let us examine this example more closely.
     First of all, the double UPDATE is shorthand for the following double assignment (this
expansion corresponds to Step a. of the definition):
         S := ( S WHERE NOT ( S# = S#('S2') ) )
                UNION
              ( UPDATE S WHERE S# = S#('S2') ( STATUS := 15 ) ) ,

         S := ( S WHERE NOT ( S# = S#('S3') ) )
                UNION
              ( UPDATE S WHERE S# = S#('S3') ( STATUS := 25 ) ) ;

      It should be clear now that if we simply evaluate the two source expressions and then perform
the two constituent assignments, the first of those assignments will have no lasting effect. The
purpose of Step b. of the definition is to take care of such problems. Applying that step, we replace
the foregoing double assignment by the following single one:
           S := WITH
              ( S WHERE NOT ( S# = S#('S2') ) )
                UNION
              ( UPDATE S WHERE S# = S#('S2') ( STATUS := 15 ) ) AS S :
              ( S WHERE NOT ( S# = S#('S3') ) )
                UNION
              ( UPDATE S WHERE S# = S#('S3') ( STATUS := 25 ) ) ;

The net effect is that, loosely speaking, the second of the two constituent assignments is performed
on the result of the first.


RM PRESCRIPTION 22: COMPARISONS

D shall support certain comparison operators, as follows:



1
    The semantics are not entirely straightforward; indeed, we got them wrong on at least three previous occasions [84].




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                      page 189
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                          Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


 a.   The operators for comparing scalars shall include “=”, “≠”, and (for ordinal types) “<”,
      “>”, etc.

 b.   The operators for comparing tuples shall include “=” and “≠” and shall not include “<”,
      “>”, etc.

 c.   The operators for comparing relations shall include “=”, “≠”, “” (“is a subset of”), and
      “” (“is a superset of”) and shall not include “<”, “>”, etc.

 d.   The operator “” for testing membership of a tuple in a relation shall be supported.

In every case mentioned except “” the comparands shall be of the same type; in the case of “”
they shall have the same heading. Note: Support for “=” for every type is in fact required by RM
Prescription 8.

                                       ———  ———

This prescription requires comparands to be of the same type (or, in the case of “”, to have the
same heading). Once again it might be possible to relax this requirement in practice; in Tutorial D,
however, we adopt the same conservative position as we did with regard to assignment and require
comparands to be of exactly the same type. (Except for “”, which is a special case. Of course, the
comparison t  r is logically equivalent to rt  r, where rt is a relation containing just tuple t, from
which fact the type requirements for such a comparison can immediately be inferred.)
      Several examples involving relation comparisons specifically have been given earlier in the
chapter, under RM Prescriptions 7 and 18.


RM PRESCRIPTION 23: INTEGRITY CONSTRAINTS

D shall provide facilities for defining and destroying integrity constraints (constraints for short).
Let C be a constraint; C can be thought of as a boolean expression (though it might not be explicitly
formulated as such), and it shall be satisfied if and only if that boolean expression evaluates to
TRUE [more text later added here]. No user shall ever see a state of affairs in which C is not
satisfied. There shall be two kinds of constraints:

 a.   A type constraint shall specify the set of values that constitute a given type.

 b.   A database constraint shall specify that values of a given set of database relvars taken in
      combination shall be such that a given boolean expression (which shall mention no variables
      other than the database relvars in question) evaluates to TRUE. Insofar as feasible, D shall
      support constraint inference for database constraints, whereby the constraints that apply to
      the result of evaluating an arbitrary relational expression shall be well defined and known to
      both the system and the user. [Explanatory note added later]

                                       ———  ———




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 190
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                          Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


Chapter 2 gave an overview of the general subject of integrity constraints—in particular, it
discussed the two kinds of constraints mentioned in the prescription—but there is quite a lot more to
be said on the subject.

Type Constraints

Note: We use the term type throughout this subsection to mean a scalar type specifically. Tuple
and relation types are subject to type constraints as well, but we defer discussion of this issue to the
final subsection (“Miscellaneous Issues”) in this section.
       A type constraint is, precisely, a definition of the set of values constituting a given type.
Several examples were given under RM Prescription 1; we repeat one of those examples here to
serve as a basis for further discussion.
      TYPE ANGLE ORDINAL
           POSSREP { RHO RATIONAL CONSTRAINT RHO  0.0 AND RHO < 2 * 3.14159 } ;

      Explanation: We concentrate on the boolean expression within the CONSTRAINT
specification:
      RHO  0.0 AND RHO < 2 * 3.14159

The two appearances of RHO here denote the RHO possrep component for an arbitrary value of
type ANGLE. Values of that type are thereby constrained to be such that they can be represented
by a rational number greater than or equal to zero and less than 2. Any expression that is
supposed to evaluate to an angle but does not yield a value in this range will fail.
      Now let us generalize from this example. It should be clear that, ultimately, the only way any
expression can yield a value of type T is by means of some invocation of some selector for type T.
Hence, the only way any expression can violate the type constraint for type T is if the selector
invocation in question does so. It follows that type constraints can always be thought of, at least
conceptually, as being checked during the execution of some selector invocation; that is, we can
never tolerate an expression that is supposed to denote a value of type T but in fact fails to do so
(indeed, “a value of type T” that is not a value of type T is simply a contradiction in terms). As a
consequence, no variable—in particular, no relvar—can ever be assigned a value that is not of the
appropriate type.
      Incidentally, it might help here to spell out the logical difference between a type error and a
type constraint error:

 ■    A type error occurs if some operator is invoked with an argument not of the type of the
      corresponding parameter.

 ■    A type constraint error occurs if some selector is invoked with arguments that violate the
      applicable type constraint.

Type errors should be detectable at compile time—except possibly as noted under OO Prescription
1 in Chapter 8—while type constraint errors will not be detectable until run time, in general.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 191
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                           Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      Anyway, as you can see from the ANGLE example, a type constraint is (as previously stated)
basically just a specification of the values that constitute the type in question. In Tutorial D,
therefore, we bundle such constraints with the definition of a possrep for the type in question, and
we identify them by means of the applicable possrep name. It follows that such a constraint can be
destroyed only by destroying the corresponding possrep, which in practice might mean destroying
the type itself.
      Note: Even if it includes no explicit CONSTRAINT specification, a declared possrep
represents an a priori constraint on the type, of course. For example, the type definition
      TYPE NAME ORDINAL POSSREP { N CHAR } ;

constrains names to be such that they can be represented by a character string. In other words,
omitting the CONSTRAINT specification from a given possrep definition is equivalent to
specifying CONSTRAINT TRUE.
      We now present some further examples in order to illustrate a number of additional points.
Here first is the ELLIPSE example once again:
      TYPE ELLIPSE POSSREP { A LENGTH, B LENGTH, CTR POINT CONSTRAINT A  B } ;

Suppose variable E is of type ELLIPSE, and its current value has a major semiaxis a of length five
and a minor semiaxis b of length four. Now consider the assignment:
      THE_B ( E ) := LENGTH ( 6.0 ) ;

This assignment will fail (why?), but it is not the assignment per se that is in error. Instead, the
error is inside a selector invocation once again—even though no such invocation is directly visible
in the example—because the assignment shown is really shorthand for this longer one:
      E := ELLIPSE ( THE_A ( E ), LENGTH ( 6.0 ), THE_CTR ( E ) ) ;

And it is the selector invocation on the right side here that fails (at run time, too, be it noted).
      Next consider type POINT, which has two possreps, POINT (cartesian coordinates) and
POLAR (polar coordinates). Suppose for the sake of the example that the only points we are
interested in are those that lie within a circle with center the origin and radius 100:
      TYPE POINT
           POSSREP POINT { X RATIONAL, Y RATIONAL
                   CONSTRAINT SQRT ( X ** 2 + Y ** 2 )  100.0 }
           POSSREP POLAR { R LENGTH, THETA ANGLE
                   CONSTRAINT R  LENGTH ( 100.0 )
                              AND IF R = LENGTH ( 0.0 )
                                  THEN THETA = ANGLE ( 0.0 ) END IF } ;

       The constraint checking here is done, conceptually, during execution of invocations of the
POINT and POLAR selectors. Note carefully that the two possreps are logically equivalent, in the
sense that every value of the type can possibly be represented either way; indeed, it would be an
error if they were not equivalent in this sense. Given this state of affairs, therefore, we can talk
unambiguously in terms of “the” type constraint for type POINT; in general, in fact, we can regard
any given type as being subject to exactly one type constraint.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       page 192
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


     Now we turn to a fairly complicated example (an extended form of one previously discussed
under RM Prescription 1):
      TYPE POLYGON
           POSSREP { VERTICES RELATION { V# INTEGER, VERTEX POINT }
           CONSTRAINT
              WITH COUNT ( VERTICES ) AS N :
                 COUNT ( VERTICES { V# } ) = N
                 AND
                 COUNT ( VERTICES { VERTEX } ) = N
                 AND
                 IS_EMPTY ( VERTICES WHERE V# < 1 OR V# > N ) } ;

       Explanation: Note first that, as explained under RM Prescription 1, type POLYGON is still a
scalar type, despite the fact that it has a possrep that involves a relational component. The
CONSTRAINT specification involves three separate constraints all ANDed together. The first
constrains values of type POLYGON to be such that no two tuples in the VERTICES relation have
the same vertex number (V#); the second constrains values of type POLYGON to be such that no
two tuples in the VERTICES relation have the same vertex (VERTEX). The third (together with
the first) ensures that if polygon p has n vertices, then the n tuples in the VERTICES relation for p
contain exactly the V# values 1, 2, ..., n.
       Finally, we return to type ELLIPSE in order to make another point. Suppose as before that
variable E is of type ELLIPSE and its current value has major and minor semiaxes of length five
and four, respectively, and consider the following assignment:
      THE_A ( E ) := LENGTH ( 3.0 ) ,
      THE_B ( E ) := LENGTH ( 2.0 ) ;

       Applying the definition of multiple assignment from RM Prescription 21, we discover that
this statement is shorthand for this one:
      E := WITH ELLIPSE ( LENGTH ( 3.0 ), THE_B ( E ), THE_CTR ( E ) ) AS E :
           ELLIPSE ( THE_B ( E ), LENGTH ( 2.0 ), THE_CTR ( E ) ) ;

      Given the stated initial values (a five and b four), however, the ellipse selector invocation
immediately following WITH will raise a type constraint error at run time; to be specific, it will
attempt to produce an ellipse with a three and b four, thereby violating the constraint a  b. In order
to avoid this problem, we can replace the original multiple assignment to THE_A(E) and THE_B(E)
by the following:
      UPDATE E ( A := LENGTH ( 3.0 ), B := LENGTH ( 2.0 ) ) ;

      Here we are using the scalar UPDATE operator (see RM Prescription 21), which is defined in
the case at hand to be shorthand for the following:
      E := ELLIPSE ( LENGTH ( 3.0 ), LENGTH ( 2.0 ), THE_CTR ( E ) ) ;

Now no type constraint error will occur.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   page 193
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


Database Constraints

Note: We use the term relvar throughout this subsection to mean a database relvar specifically.
       A database constraint is a constraint on the values a given database is permitted to assume.
Such a constraint must not mention any variables apart from database relvars, but otherwise can be
arbitrarily complex. Several examples of such constraints (DBC1-DBC5) were shown in Chapter 2,
but we give a few more here.
      CONSTRAINT DBC6 IS_EMPTY ( P ) OR
                      COUNT ( P WHERE COLOR = COLOR('Red') ) > 0 ;

Meaning: If there are any parts at all, at least one of them must be red.
    For our next example, we return to the relvar SPQ first discussed under RM Prescription 7:
      VAR SPQ ... RELATION { S# S#, PQ RELATION { P# P#, QTY QTY } } ... ;

      CONSTRAINT DBC7 COUNT   ( SPQ UNGROUP ( PQ ) ) =
                      COUNT ( ( SPQ UNGROUP ( PQ ) ) { S#, P# } ) ;

Meaning: Within any SPQ tuple, no two distinct tuples in the PQ value have the same part number;
equivalently, {S#,P#} is a superkey—see Chapter 2—for the result of SPQ UNGROUP (PQ) (we
are relying here on the fact that {S#} is a candidate key for SPQ). Now, you might be surprised to
learn that Tutorial D deliberately does not allow attribute PQ of relvar SPQ to be defined thus:
      PQ RELATION { P# P#, QTY QTY } KEY { P# }

(italics for emphasis). One reason for this state of affairs—not the only one—is that such syntax
would apparently imply that the key constraint for relation-valued attribute PQ (to speak very
loosely!) is part of the relation type definition for relvar SPQ, which is not the case.
       One more example:
      CONSTRAINT DBC8 SP { P# } = P { P# } ;

Meaning: There must be at least one shipment for every part. (Of course, it is also the case that
there must be exactly one part for every shipment, by virtue of the fact that {P#} is a candidate key
for parts and a matching foreign key for shipments, but we have not bothered to show this latter
constraint here.)
       Database constraints are conceptually checked at the end of any statement that might cause
them to be violated (“immediate checking”). Thus, any statement that attempts to assign a value to
a given relvar or combination of relvars that violates any database constraint will effectively just be
rejected. Note: Conventional wisdom has it that database constraints need not be checked until
end-of-transaction or COMMIT time (“deferred checking”). As shown in reference [84], however,
deferred checking opens the door to numerous problems; moreover, given the availability of
multiple assignment, which allows us to perform any number of updates as a single operation, it is
logically unnecessary, and we therefore prohibit it. In other words (quoting RM Prescription 23,
but with added emphasis): No user shall ever see a state of affairs in which [any constraint] is not
satisfied.
       Here is an example of destroying a database constraint:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 194
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                          Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


      DROP CONSTRAINT DBC3 ;

     Of course, database constraints can apply to any combination of real and virtual relvars, in
general:

 ■    A given real relvar R considered in isolation can be regarded as being subject to just those
      database constraints that mention that relvar R (as briefly discussed in Chapter 2).

 ■    A given virtual relvar V considered in isolation can be regarded as being subject to constraints
      that are derived in the obvious way from the expression that defines V. For example, consider
      the following virtual relvar XS:
      VAR XS VIRTUAL ( EXTEND S ADD ( 3 * STATUS AS TRIPLE ) ) ;

      Relvar XS is subject to all of the constraints that apply to relvar S, together with the additional
      constraint that, within any XS tuple, the TRIPLE value must be three times the STATUS
      value.

 ■    For a final example, suppose we define two virtual relvars as follows:
      VAR LS    VIRTUAL ( S WHERE CITY = 'London' ) ;

      VAR NLS VIRTUAL ( S WHERE NOT ( CITY = 'London' ) ) ;

      Then relvars S, LS, and NLS taken in combination are subject to the following constraint:
      CONSTRAINT DBC9 D_UNION { LS { S# }, NLS { S# } } = S { S# } ;

      Actually, an unwise expression was given for DBC9 as the invocation of D_UNION causes a
      run time error whenever a tuple appears in both LS and NLS. A better definition is
      CONSTRAINT DBC9 WITH LS { S# } AS LSS#, NLS { S# } AS NLSS# :
                        IS_EMPTY ( LSS# MATCHING NLSS# ) AND
                        IS_EMPTY ( ( LSS# UNION NLSS# ) NOT MATCHING S ) ;
      and now the run time error is a genuine constraint violation.

Constraint Inference

In the past, integrity constraints have typically been thought of as applying to “real” data only, but
we regard them as applying to “virtual” data as well, as already indicated. Constraint inference is
the process of inferring the constraints that apply to such virtual data from those that apply to the
real data in terms of which that virtual data is defined.
      We have already seen a couple of examples of constraint inference in action (see the examples
involving virtual relvar XS in the previous subsection and virtual relvar LS under RM Prescription
21). For more specifics, see Appendix E, also reference [28] and the discussion of RM Very Strong
Suggestion 3 in Chapter 10. Note: There are known to be certain limits on the degree to which
constraint inference might be feasible in practice (see, e.g., reference [5]). This fact accounts for the




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 195
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                         Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


slightly hesitant tone of the final portion of RM Prescription 23, which requires only that D shall
support constraint inference “insofar as feasible.”

Miscellaneous Issues

We close this section with a few miscellaneous points having to do with integrity constraints in
general.
      First we consider the question of type constraints for tuple and relation types. Such types are
certainly subject to such constraints, but the constraints in question are essentially just a logical
consequence of those that apply to the types in terms of which those tuple and relation types are
defined. For example, consider the following tuple type once again:
         TUPLE { NAME NAME,
                 ADDR TUPLE { STREET CHAR, CITY CHAR, STATE CHAR, ZIP CHAR } }

       Values of this type are constrained to be tuples with two components, NAME and ADDR.
Values of the NAME component are constrained to be values of type NAME. Values of the ADDR
component are constrained to be tuples with four components, STREET, CITY, STATE, and ZIP ...
and so on.
       Now, it might be desirable to impose more restrictive type constraints on tuple and relation
types (more restrictive, that is, than those just mentioned—viz., the ones implied by the types in
terms of which those tuple and relation types are defined). In the case of the tuple type just
discussed, for example, we might want to impose the additional constraint that STATE values are
valid U.S. state names. Now, we can achieve this particular effect easily enough by specifying
attribute STATE to be of type STATE_NAME, say (instead of CHAR), where STATE_NAME is
defined as follows:
TYPE STATE_NAME
     POSSREP { SN CHAR CONSTRAINT SN = 'Alabama'
                               OR SN = 'Alaska'
                               ............
                               OR SN = 'Wyoming' } ;

       What we cannot do, however, is say that STATE is of type STATE_NAME as just defined
and that STATE values are limited to (say) Alaska, California, and Hawaii.1 In order to be able to
do such a thing, we would need to be able to express an appropriate type constraint as part of the
operation that defines the tuple type in question. And we saw under RM Prescription 6 that
Tutorial D, at least, currently (and deliberately) supports no such operation.
       The second of our miscellaneous issues has to do with constraints on application-local or
nondatabase data. RM Prescription 23 concentrates on database data specifically2 because database
data is the principal focus of the Manifesto. However, constraints analogous to those we have been
discussing could well apply to local or private data also; to be specific, such constraints could apply
to scalar and tuple variables and to private relvars. (Public relvars are a special case; the constraints

1
 We could use the facilities defined in Part IV of this book to achieve something similar—though not identical—to the
desired effect, but the details are beyond the scope of the present discussion.
2
    And on types, of course, which are relevant to both database and nondatabase data.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                 page 196
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                             Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


that apply to those are derived, in accordance with the constraint inference mechanism already
discussed, from the constraints that apply to their counterparts in the database.) We choose not to
discuss such matters any further in this book.
      The last of our miscellaneous issues has to do with business rules. Now, this term is not very
precisely defined, but one interpretation is that a business rule is simply an integrity constraint
(albeit one that is, usually, expressed in natural language instead of a formal language like Tutorial
D). Thus, a DBMS that supports integrity constraints in accordance with RM Prescription 23 might
be seen as what some writers would refer to as a rule engine [66].


RM PRESCRIPTION 24: TOTAL DATABASE CONSTRAINTS

Let DB be a database; let DBC1, DBC2, ..., DBCn be all of the database constraints defined for
DB (see RM Prescription 23); and let DBC be any boolean expression that is logically equivalent
to
      ( DBC1 ) AND ( DBC2 ) AND ... AND ( DBCn ) AND TRUE

Then DBC is the total database constraint for DB.

                                        ———  ———

The purpose of this prescription is simply to pin down the notion of what might be called,
informally, “the” constraint for a given database. Loosely speaking, the total constraint for a given
database is the logical AND of all of the individual constraints specified for that database.
       Note: RM Prescription 23 requires that no user shall ever see a state of affairs in which any
individual database constraint is violated, and hence necessarily that no user shall ever see a state of
affairs in which the total database constraint is violated. Thus, no assignment statement can ever
leave the database in a state that violates its own total constraint: a state of affairs that we refer to as
The Golden Rule.


RM PRESCRIPTION 25: CATALOG

Every database shall include a set of database relvars that constitute the catalog for that database.
D shall provide facilities for assigning to relvars in the catalog. [Explanatory note added later]

                                        ———  ———

Note that—as is in fact required by RM Prescriptions 16 and 17—we regard the catalog as part of
the database it describes, not as a separate database in its own right. It follows that the catalog must
be self-describing. This point aside, we deliberately make no attempt to prescribe the structure of
the catalog in detail.
      As for D providing “facilities for assigning to relvars in the catalog”: All this means is that it
must be possible for suitably authorized users to update the catalog appropriately. In practice, of
course, such assignments will normally be performed by means of data definition operators: “define




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        page 197
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                     Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


type,” “define relvar,” “define constraint,” “drop type,” and so on. (Note, therefore, that “define
type” and the rest are all update operators, in the last analysis.)


RM PRESCRIPTION 26: LANGUAGE DESIGN

D shall be constructed according to well-established principles of good language design.

                                            ———  ———

As with RM Prescription 18 (where we required the operators of the relational algebra to be
“expressible without excessive circumlocution”), we recognize that this prescription is not very
precise as it stands, but it is difficult to make it more so. However, the general intent is just that D
should avoid the many design errors we observe in SQL in particular (see, for example, references
[41], [44-45], and [62], among others). To quote reference [43]:

      There are well-established principles for the design of languages, but little evidence that SQL has been designed
      in accordance with any of them [slightly reworded].

      Examples of such principles include generality, parsimony, completeness, similarity,
extensibility, openness, and especially orthogonality. (This list is taken from reference [6]; a
somewhat similar list can be found in reference [31]. See also the remarks on conceptual integrity
in Chapter 1.) In connection with the principle of orthogonality in particular [54], we would like to
say that we agree strongly with the following remarks from reference [119]:

      Most languages are too big and intellectually unmanageable. The problems arise in part because the language is
      too restrictive; the number of rules needed to define a language increases when a general rule has additional rules
      attached to constrain its use in certain cases. (Ironically, these additional rules usually make the language less
      powerful.) ... Power through simplicity, simplicity through generality, should be the guiding principle [italics in
      the original].


EXERCISES

6.1    RM Prescription 1 requires support for “all four monadic and 16 dyadic logical operators.”
       Give truth tables for all of these operators.

6.2    The truth table for the logical operator NOR (also known as the Peirce arrow and usually
       written as a down arrow, ““) is as follows:
       p q │ p|q
       ──────┼──────
       T T │     F
       T F │     F
       F T │     F
       F F │     T

       As you can see, pq is equivalent to NOT p AND NOT q (it can be thought of as neither
       nor—neither the first nor the second operand is TRUE). Show that all 20 monadic and




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                   page 198
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                       Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


       dyadic logical operators can be formulated in terms of this operator alone. Is the same true
       of the operator OR? (OR, of course, can be thought of as the negation of NOR.)

6.3    Define a virtual relvar (view) consisting of supplier numbers and part numbers for suppliers
       and parts that are not colocated.

6.4    Tutorial D goes beyond RM Prescription 6 in that it supports tuple analogs of certain
       additional relational operators: compose, wrap/unwrap, and substitute (see Chapter 5).
       Provide definitions for these tuple operators.

6.5    Show that the relational operators GROUP and UNGROUP are really just shorthand for
       certain combinations of other operators.

6.6    Reference [85] defines another relational operator of a grouping nature called PACK (as
       well as a corresponding UNPACK operator). If you are familiar with these operators, are
       GROUP and UNGROUP just special cases? Justify your answer.

6.7    SQL includes a “relational” update operator called MERGE that can be described,
       informally, as a combination of INSERT and UPDATE; very loosely speaking, each source
       tuple is used to update the matching target tuple, if such a matching tuple exists, or is
       inserted otherwise. Design an analogous operator for Tutorial D.

6.8    Why are there only two relations of degree zero?

6.9    The following SQL query is not valid but should be:
       SELECT DISTINCT
       FROM   S, SP
       WHERE S.S# = SP.S# AND         S.CITY = 'Athens' ;

       What do you think it should return? Give a natural language interpretation of the query.
       What do you think the interpretation should be if DISTINCT were omitted?

6.10   TABLE_DEE and TABLE_DUM can be interpreted as TRUE and FALSE, respectively. So
       can we dispense with type BOOLEAN after all?

6.11   Investigate the effect of the algebraic operations discussed under RM Prescription 18 on
       TABLE_DEE and TABLE_DUM.

6.12   Let R be defined as TCLOSE A. What is the predicate for R?

6.13   In the body of the chapter, we gave one reason why Tutorial D does not provide a separate
       “define tuple type” or “define relation type” operator. Can you think of any other
       advantages of the Tutorial D approach?




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                 page 199
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                      Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


6.14   Loosely, we might say that two databases DB1 and DB2 are information-equivalent if and
       only if every relation that can be derived from DB1 can also be derived from DB2 and vice
       versa. What is involved in making this definition more precise?

6.15   Show that any expression involving SUMMARIZE can always be replaced by one involving
       EXTEND instead.

6.16   Let E be a variable of declared type ELLIPSE (see, e.g., RM Prescription 1 for a definition
       of this type). What is the logical difference, if any, between the following statements?
       UPDATE E ( B := LENGTH ( 2.0 ) ) ;

       THE_B ( E ) := LENGTH ( 2.0 ) ;


6.17   With E as in the previous exercise, show the expanded form of the following statement:
       UPDATE E ( A := LENGTH ( 3.0 ), THE_X ( CTR ) := 5.0 ) ;

6.18   Let that same variable E denote an ellipse with a five and b four. Then the following
       statement will give rise to a type error; why?
       THE_A ( E ) := LENGTH ( 3.0 ) , THE_B ( E ) := LENGTH ( 2.0 ) ;

       The following, by contrast, will not; why not?
       UPDATE E ( A := LENGTH ( 3.0 ), B := LENGTH ( 2.0 ) ) ;

6.19   Let operator INTEGERS be as follows: The expression INTEGERS(a,b)—where we
       assume for simplicity that a  b—yields a relation with just one attribute (also of type
       INTEGER) called N. The body of that relation contains one tuple for each integer from a to
       b inclusive (each such tuple containing just the integer in question), and no other tuples.
       Write a Tutorial D definition of this operator.

6.20   Consider relvar SPQ, discussed under RM Prescription 7 and elsewhere:
       VAR SPQ REAL RELATION { S# S#, PQ RELATION { P# P#, QTY QTY } }
               KEY { S# } ;

       What is the predicate for this relvar?

6.21   Let T be an ordered tree, defined as follows. T consists of N nodes (N  0). Every node
       has a sequence of M child nodes (M  0); if M = 0, the node is a leaf node. Every child
       node has exactly one parent node. If N > 0, exactly one node (the root) is not a child node.
       Devise a relational representation for T. Define and write implementation code for operators
       to traverse T in preorder, postorder, and inorder (see, e.g., Knuth [105] if you are not
       familiar with these terms).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                page 200
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                        Chapter 6 / RM Prescriptions


6.22   Several commercial products support the concept of tuple IDs in some shape or form. If you
       are familiar with such a product, do you think its support for tuple IDs constitutes a violation
       of The Information Principle? Justify your answer.

6.23   Does it make sense for a possrep to have a component whose type is empty?

6.24   Why is the phrase “an empty relation type” a contradiction in terms?

6.25   Can you think of an example of a type that might sensibly be recursively defined? Can you
       give a Tutorial D definition for such a type?

6.26   Does Tutorial D as defined in Chapter 5 prohibit recursively defined tuple and relation
       types? If not, do you think it should?

6.27   Evaluate Tutorial D against RM Prescription 26.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   page 201