                                                     Chapter 7

                                         RM Proscriptions

RM PROSCRIPTION 1: NO ATTRIBUTE ORDERING

D shall include no concept of a “relation” whose attributes are distinguishable by ordinal position.
Instead, for every relation r expressible in D, the attributes of r shall be distinguishable by name.

                                             ———  ———

By definition, the attributes of a relation—at least as that term is used in the relational model—have
no left-to-right ordering and hence cannot be distinguished by ordinal position.1 Instead, they are
distinguished by name. And in The Third Manifesto, by virtue of several of the RM Prescriptions
taken together, every attribute of every relation is indeed distinguishable by name. To be more
specific, every relation in D is obtained by evaluating some relational expression, and (at least in
Tutorial D) the rules for such expressions are such as to guarantee that the desired property is
satisfied. For let rx be such an expression. The

    ■   If rx consists of a relational expression enclosed in parentheses, then its semantics are the
        same as if those parentheses were removed.

    ■   If rx consists of a relation selector invocation, then the attribute names are specified,
        implicitly or explicitly, as part of that invocation.

    ■   If rx consists of a relvar reference (in other words, a relvar name), then the attribute names are
        specified, implicitly or explicitly, as part of the definition of the relvar in question.

    ■   If rx consists of a THE_ operator invocation in which the possrep component being accessed
        is relation valued, then the attribute names are specified, implicitly or explicitly, as part of the
        definition of the relation-valued component in question.

    ■   If rx consists of an attribute extractor invocation in which the attribute being accessed is
        relation valued, then the attribute names are specified, implicitly or explicitly, as part of the
        definition of the attribute in question.

    ■   If rx consists of an invocation of a user-defined relational operator, then the attribute names
        are specified, implicitly or explicitly, as part of the definition of the operator in question.




1
 For reasons that need not concern us here, relations in mathematics, unlike their counterparts in the relational model,
do have a left-to-right order to their attributes (and likewise for tuples, of course).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     page 202
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                    Chapter 7 / RM Proscriptions


    ■   If rx consists of an invocation of some built-in relational operator, then the attribute names are
        inferred by means of the prescribed relation type inference mechanism.

    ■   If rx consists of an <introduced name> or a <relation with expression>, then rx is basically
        shorthand for one of the cases already considered.

      Despite all of the foregoing, we still feel it worthwhile to state RM Proscription 1 explicitly,
owing to the mistakes we observe in SQL in this connection (mistakes, in fact, that show—or,
rather, are among those that show—that SQL tables are not true relations). Among other things, the
proscription implies:

    ■   No anonymous attributes, as in SQL’s SELECT A+B FROM T and its VALUES construct
        (the latter of which is effectively SQL’s counterpart to the Manifesto’s relation selector)

    ■   No duplicate attribute names, as in SQL’s SELECT A, A FROM T and SELECT T1.A, T2.A
        FROM T1, T2

    ■   No shorthands that rely on attribute ordering, as in SQL’s SELECT * INTO ... FROM T and
        INSERT INTO T VALUES (...)1

    ■   No hidden “tuple ID” or timestamp attributes, as in some of today’s SQL implementations

      The problems caused by a failure to abide by RM Proscription 1 are discussed in detail in
references [32] and [75].
      A note on SQL: The experienced SQL user might observe that SQL applications can
sometimes safely use what might be called “pseudorelational” expressions such as SELECT A+B
FROM T by providing the required column names in the context (the context, that is, in which those
expressions are embedded). For example, the expression
        SELECT * FROM ( SELECT A + B FROM T ) AS X ( C )

returns a table with a single column named C, despite the anonymous column in the table returned
by the subquery SELECT A+B FROM T. Similarly, the expression
        VALUES ( 1, 2 )

returns a table with one row and two anonymous columns; however, in the expression
        SELECT A FROM ( VALUES ( 1, 2 ) ) AS T ( A, B )

the column names A and B are specified in the context. Analogous remarks apply to examples like
this one:


1
 The problem with these SQL constructs is that they rely on the left-to-right attribute ordering as defined in the
corresponding CREATE or ALTER TABLE statement(s), instead of on a left-to-right ordering specified within the
SELECT or INSERT statement itself.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                  page 203
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 7 / RM Proscriptions


      INSERT INTO T ( A, B ) VALUES ( 1, 2 ) ;

       Clearly, applications that use such “pseudorelational” expressions only in safe contexts are
immune to external changes in column order. Thus, it might be argued that the syntax SQL
provides for “pseudorelational” expressions can conveniently be used in place of relational
expressions in certain safe contexts. But admitting “pseudorelations” into the language at all gives
rise to all sorts of needless complication for everybody concerned—end users, administrators,
application developers, teachers, students, standardizers, DBMS implementers, and so on. Hence
this proscription, and hence Tutorial D’s required attribute names in the syntax for its EXTEND,
SUMMARIZE, and relation selector operators.


RM PROSCRIPTION 2: NO TUPLE ORDERING

D shall include no concept of a “relation” whose tuples are distinguishable by ordinal position.
Instead, for every relation r expressible in D, the tuples of r shall be distinguishable by value.

                                      ———  ———

By definition, the tuples of a relation have no top-to-bottom ordering and hence cannot be
distinguished by ordinal position. Of course, this fact does not mean that such an ordering cannot
be imposed for, e.g., presentation purposes; however, it does mean that the effect of imposing such
an ordering is to convert the relation into something that is not a relation (typically a one-
dimensional array of tuples—see the discussion of RM Proscription 7 later in this chapter). It also
means that:

 ■    The operator that imposes the ordering is not a relational operator, precisely because the result
      is not a relation.

 ■    The operator in question therefore cannot appear in a relational expression; in particular, it
      cannot appear in the definition of a virtual relvar.


RM PROSCRIPTION 3: NO DUPLICATE TUPLES

D shall include no concept of a “relation” containing two distinct tuples t1 and t2 such that the
comparison “t1 = t2” evaluates to TRUE. It follows that (as already stated in RM Proscription 2),
for every relation r expressible in D, the tuples of r shall be distinguishable by value.

                                      ———  ———

By definition, relations do not contain duplicate tuples. Yet SQL does permit duplicate “tuples” in




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 204
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                    Chapter 7 / RM Proscriptions


its tables1—another of the many reasons why SQL tables are not true relations [72]. In the
Manifesto, by contrast, duplicate tuples are absolutely, categorically, and unequivocally outlawed.
What we tell you three times is true.


RM PROSCRIPTION 4: NO NULLS

D shall include no concept of a “relation” in which some “tuple” includes some “attribute” that
does not have a value.
                                            ———  ———

By definition, tuples, and therefore relations, do not contain nulls (nulls are not values!). SQL,
however, does permit nulls in its tables—yet another reason why SQL tables are not true relations.
In the Manifesto, by contrast, nulls are absolutely, categorically, and unequivocally outlawed (and
so too therefore is n-valued logic for any n > 2).


RM PROSCRIPTION 5: NO NULLOLOGICAL MISTAKES

D shall not forget that relations with no attributes are respectable and interesting, nor that
candidate keys with no components are likewise respectable and interesting.

                                            ———  ———

Nullology is the study of the empty set [29] (it has nothing to with nulls!). Now, sets in general are
ubiquitous in the relational world; for example, a relation has both a set of attributes and a set of
tuples. And, since the empty set is certainly a set, it follows that wherever D permits sets in general
to appear, it should permit empty sets in particular to appear as well. Two important special cases
are those mentioned in this proscription: relations with no attributes and candidate keys with no
components. We discussed the first of these under RM Prescription 10 in Chapter 6; now we offer a
few words on the second.
        Since relations and relvars with no attributes are permitted, candidate keys with no
components (“empty keys”) must certainly be permitted too. Indeed, such a key is the only
candidate key—the only possible candidate key!—for a relvar with no attributes; but other relvars
(i.e., relvars with at least one attribute) can have empty keys, too. In fact, to say that relvar R has an
empty key is to say, precisely and possibly usefully, that R never contains more than one tuple [29].
Incidentally, if relvar R has an empty key, then that empty key is the only key for R (why?).
        At the time of writing, SQL does not support either relations with no attributes or keys with
no components. Note: These omissions are not the only nullological mistakes in SQL, but they are
among the most egregious. Others include incorrect treatment, in a variety of ways, of relations
with no tuples (see, e.g., references [49-50] and [62]), and inconsistent treatment, again in a variety

1
  Possibly because the SQL designers thought duplicate removal would be expensive, especially if the table in question
in fact had no duplicates in the first place. However, reference [28] shows that it is often possible to prove that
duplicates cannot occur, in which case the duplicate removal process can be “optimized away.”




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                  page 205
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 7 / RM Proscriptions


of ways, of dyadic relational operators when the relations involved have no common attributes (see,
e.g., reference [41]). See also the discussion of OO Prescription 6 in Chapter 8.


RM PROSCRIPTION 6: NO INTERNAL-LEVEL CONSTRUCTS

D shall include no constructs that relate to, or are logically affected by, the “physical” or
“storage” or “internal” levels of the system.

                                      ———  ———

This proscription is a logical consequence of the strong separation we insist on between model and
implementation (it should be obvious that allowing implementation considerations to show through
at the model level undermines physical data independence, and it can adversely affect portability
and intersystem operability, too). Here are some specific corollaries of this proscription:

 ■    The mapping between public application relvars and database relvars (discussed under RM
      Prescription 14 in Chapter 6) is defined by means of some logically distinct mapping
      language and is not visible to the application.

 ■    Like the relational model, the Manifesto deliberately does not say which database relvars if
      any are physically stored and which not; in particular, it expressly does not say that real ones
      are physically stored and virtual ones not, nor does it say anything about the storage structures
      to be used for those relvars that are physically stored. To do otherwise would be quite
      inappropriate. However, we remark that many SQL implementations use storage structures
      that bear a close resemblance to the perceived structure of a relation, thereby encouraging bad
      practice such as “denormalization” and the use of nulls. For better approaches, see references
      [81] and [134].

 ■    RM Prescription 4 refers to “some kind of storage structure definition language.” RM
      Proscription 6 implies that the statements of that language—in particular, the mappings of
      databases to physical storage—must be cleanly separable from everything in D.

 ■    As discussed at several points in Chapter 6, the storage structure definition language
      mentioned in RM Prescription 4 is used to define (among other things) physical
      representations of scalar values and variables. Those physical representations are thus hidden
      from the user—i.e., they are not visible in D. Analogous remarks apply to tuple and relation
      values and variables, of course, as well as to scalar ones.

      Note: RM Proscription 6 does not prohibit support for operators that expose certain aspects of
the implementation for, e.g., debugging purposes (EXPLAIN, which is supported by several of
today’s SQL products, is an example of such an operator). However, we do not regard such
operators as part of D.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 206
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                           Chapter 7 / RM Proscriptions


RM PROSCRIPTION 7: NO TUPLE-LEVEL OPERATIONS

D shall support no tuple-at-a-time operations on relvars or relations.

                                       ———  ———

The operators of the relational algebra—which are, by definition, all read-only operators—are set-
at-a-time, in the sense that their operands and results are whole relations (i.e., sets of tuples, loosely
speaking) rather than individual tuples per se. As a consequence, there is never any need for
applications to access some relation a tuple at a time in order to compute some desired result, and D
is therefore expressly prohibited from supporting such operations. If the application does need to
process some relation tuple by tuple for some reason (perhaps for display or printing purposes), it
should not have to access that relation piecemeal as SQL does with its operation of “fetching via a
cursor.” In Tutorial D, we prefer the approach of simply “loading” the tuples of the relation in
question, in some specified order, into a local array variable, after which the application can iterate
over the array elements in the familiar fashion. Here is an example:
      VAR I INTEGER ;
      VAR SX S# ;
      VAR QX QTY ;
      VAR SQA ARRAY TUPLE { S# S#, QTY QTY } ;

      LOAD SQA
      FROM ( SP WHERE P# = P#('P1') ) { S#, QTY }
      ORDER ( ASC S# ) ;

      DO I := 1 TO COUNT ( SQA ) ;
         BEGIN ;
            SX := S# FROM SQA (I) ,                            /* “fetch” ith S# */
            QX := QTY FROM SQA (I) ;                           /* and QTY values */
            /* now process SX and QX */
         END ;
      END DO ;

       Note that this approach does not imply that the array variable need be accommodated entirely
in main memory (i.e., it can “spill” out on to the disk if necessary). Note also that the load
operation does not necessarily need to behave like a “breakpoint” (meaning the last tuple must be
loaded before the instruction immediately following the LOAD can be executed). Thus, we see no
reason why all of the requirements satisfied by SQL’s “FETCH via a cursor” cannot be satisfied at
least equally well by our approach.
       As for update operators, the intent of the proscription is to prohibit D from supporting, e.g., an
operation that inserts just a single tuple into a relvar, if that operation is the only means of inserting
tuples into relvars (as was the case in some early SQL implementations). Multi-tuple INSERTs are
effectively mandated by our required support for relational assignment. If a single-tuple INSERT is
supported, it must be definable as shorthand for inserting a relation of cardinality one. Similar
remarks apply to DELETE and UPDATE operators, if supported.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      page 207
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 7 / RM Proscriptions


RM PROSCRIPTION 8: NO COMPOSITE ATTRIBUTES

D shall not include any specific support for “composite” or “compound” attributes, since such
functionality can more cleanly be achieved, if desired, through the type support already prescribed.

                                      ———  ———

It is sometimes suggested—see, for example, reference [23]—that it should be possible somehow to
combine, say, attributes S# and P# from the shipments relvar SP into a single composite attribute,
S#_P# say. Reference [53] argues against this idea, strongly. It does not seem appropriate, or
necessary, to repeat all of the arguments of reference [53] here; suffice it to say that the kind of
“composite attribute” support typically proposed mixes together all kinds of notions that would be
better kept separate. As RM Proscription 8 suggests, the functionality in question can effectively be
achieved anyway, if desired, by means of the type support prescribed elsewhere in the Manifesto.


RM PROSCRIPTION 9: NO DOMAIN CHECK OVERRIDE

D shall include no “domain check override” operators, since such operators are both ad hoc and
unnecessary.

                                      ———  ———

Recall that domain is just another term for type, and “domain check override” [23] thus means, in
essence, overriding the system’s type-checking mechanism: on the face of it, not a very desirable
goal! Space precludes a detailed explanation here, but basically the objective is to allow, e.g., joins
to be done even when the join attributes are defined on different domains (i.e., are of different
types). However, closer analysis reveals that the whole idea is based on a failure to make a clear
distinction between types and representations. Not only is it ad hoc and unnecessary, therefore (as
RM Proscription 9 states), but it simply does not stand up at all, logically speaking, under proper
scrutiny, and we therefore reject it.


RM PROSCRIPTION 10: NOT SQL

D shall not be called SQL

                                      ———  ———

Little seems necessary by way of elaboration here; we are merely trying to “head off at the pass”
certain marketing tricks—not without precedent—that we suspect might be tried if some version of
D were ever to become a commercial reality.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 208
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                       Chapter 7 / RM Proscriptions


EXERCISES

7.1    Why is the prohibition against top-to-bottom tuple ordering (RM Proscription 2) a good
       idea?

7.2    Suppose that, RM Prescription 1 notwithstanding, there were a left-to-right ordering to the
       attributes of a relation. Define as precisely as you can a UNION operator for such
       “relations.”

7.3    Which of the RM Proscriptions does SQL violate? Which of those violations constitute
       violations of The Information Principle?

7.4    (Repeated from the body of the chapter) If relvar R has an empty key K, then that key K is
       the only candidate key for R. Why?

7.5    Why are tuple-at-a-time operators prohibited (RM Proscription 7)?

7.6    Why are composite attributes prohibited (RM Proscription 8)?

7.7    What exactly is wrong with “domain check override” (RM Proscription 9)?

7.8    What in a nutshell is the objection to nulls and many-valued logic (RM Proscription 4)?
       What is the argument in favor of these constructs?

7.9    In the suppliers-and-parts database, suppose some parts have no color and some have an
       unknown weight. Modify the design of Fig. 2.1 (in Chapter 2) accordingly. Note: This
       exercise might be suitable as a basis for group discussion.

7.10   Consider any SQL product that might be available to you. Does that product involve any
       violations of RM Proscription 6? Identify as many such violations as you can. If possible,
       perform this exercise for at least two different SQL products and compare the results.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                 page 209