                                                    Chapter 8

                                        OO Prescriptions

OO PRESCRIPTION 1: COMPILE-TIME TYPE CHECKING

D shall permit compile-time type checking.

                                            ———  ———

By this prescription, we mean merely that, insofar as feasible, it shall be possible to check at
compile time that no type errors can occur at run time; in other words, type errors shall be
detectable by inspection of the program source text alone (again, insofar as feasible). Of course,
this requirement does not preclude the possibility of “compile and go” or interpretive
implementations.
       Compile-time type checking is also known as static type checking. It is widely regarded as a
desirable objective [135]. We remark, however, that it cannot be fully achieved if (but only if) type
inheritance is supported; that is, there will be certain situations with inheritance in which type
checking cannot be completed until run time—hence the “insofar as feasible” qualifications above.
See OO Prescription 2 (also the discussion of the TREAT operator in Chapter 14) for further
discussion.
       Incidentally, it has been suggested that OO Prescription 1 is in conflict with RM Prescription
25 (which requires the catalog to be updatable), because updating the catalog at run time could
invalidate the type checking that was done at compile time. But all that is needed to avoid this
problem is a mechanism for repeating the type checking at run time—perhaps by recompiling the
source code—if such updates occur. Some DBMS products behave in exactly this manner today.


OO PRESCRIPTION 2: TYPE INHERITANCE (CONDITIONAL)

If D supports type inheritance, then such support shall conform to the inheritance model defined in
Part IV of this book. [More text later added here]

                                            ———  ———

Despite the fact that languages and products that support some kind of type inheritance do exist
(and indeed have done so for some time), and despite the fact that type inheritance has been
discussed for many years in books and articles and presentations, there is still no consensus in the
data management community on a formal, rigorous, and abstract type inheritance model. To quote
reference [131]:

      The basic idea of inheritance is quite simple ... [and yet, despite] its central role in current object systems,
      inheritance is still quite a controversial mechanism ... [A] comprehensive view of inheritance is still missing.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     page 210
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                          Chapter 8 / OO Prescriptions


       Part IV of this book describes an inheritance model that (we believe) could serve to fill this
gap. The model in question is one that has been developed and refined over the past several years
by the present authors, and we offer it as a serious candidate for consideration by the community at
large. We do not include it as a mandatory component of the Manifesto, however—we merely
insist that if type inheritance is supported at all, then that support shall be based on the model
described in Part IV.
       As an aside, we speculate that one reason for the aforementioned lack of consensus is that
inheritance was first introduced in the context of software engineering; i.e., it was more of an
implementation idea than a theoretical one, intended primarily to simplify certain aspects of
software development and maintenance (see, e.g., references [9] and [100]). Its application to, and
attempted incorporation into, an abstract theory of data came later. If this speculation is correct,
then there is a parallel that can usefully be drawn with the development of database systems in
general. To spell that parallel out:

 ■    The early (hierarchic and network) database systems can be seen as attempts to impose a thin
      layer of abstraction over certain implementation techniques that were in wide use at the time.

 ■    However, those systems never really succeeded in making the clear distinction between model
      and implementation that we now regard as so important.

 ■    Indeed, that distinction was not properly made until 1969, when the relational model—a true,
      abstract, implementation-independent model (or theory) of data—was first defined.

       Analogously, we see at least some of the current inheritance “models” not as true models per
se, but merely as attempts to abstract just a little from certain current implementation techniques
(and again we observe a failure to make a clear distinction between model and implementation).
       We should also say something about the distinction between single and multiple inheritance.
Briefly (and somewhat loosely), single inheritance means each subtype has a single supertype, and
hence inherits properties from just that one type; multiple inheritance means a subtype can have two
or more supertypes, and hence can inherit properties from two or more types. (Of course, these
ideas are elaborated, considerably, in Part IV of this book.) Now, it has often been argued that it
might be possible to support single inheritance only, without worrying about the additional
complexities (if any) of multiple inheritance. Our position, by contrast, is rather different: We
believe that single inheritance logically implies multiple inheritance, and hence that support for
single inheritance by itself makes little sense. Thus, we require that, if D supports inheritance at all,
it must support multiple inheritance in particular. (This latter requirement does not imply that an
implementation that supports inheritance needs to support every last detail of our model, however;
for example, it might be possible to omit support for what we call dummy types.)
       We observe finally that support for inheritance implies certain extensions to—among other
things—the definitions in Chapters 4 and 6 of scalar, tuple, and relation values and scalar, tuple, and
relation variables. As indicated under OO Prescription 1 above, it also implies a need to relax the
static type checking requirement slightly. See Part IV for further discussion (especially Chapter
14).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 211
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 8 / OO Prescriptions


OO PRESCRIPTION 3: COMPUTATIONAL COMPLETENESS

D shall be computationally complete. That is, D may support, but shall not require, invocation
from so-called host programs written in languages other than D. Similarly, D may support, but
shall not require, the use of other languages for implementation of user-defined operators.

                                      ———  ———

The general intent of this prescription is twofold:

 ■    It must be possible to write entire applications in D, instead of having to use one language for
      database access and another for general computation. In other words, we do not endorse the
      “embedded data sublanguage” approach adopted in SQL (we do not prohibit it, either, but we
      do insist that users should have the option of not having to use it). Note: Over the years, the
      idea that users should not have to use an embedded data sublanguage in order to access the
      database has been proposed by many people, including one of the present authors [42]. As
      noted in Chapter 5, one important consequence of that idea is that we can avoid the problem
      of “impedance mismatch” between the types available inside the database and those available
      outside; i.e., there is no need to map between the (arbitrarily complex) types used inside the
      database and the (possibly rather simple, and almost certainly different) types provided by
      some host language.

 ■    It must be possible to use D to write the code that implements user-defined operators, instead
      of having to resort to using some other language for this purpose. Note: Several examples of
      Tutorial D operator definitions were given in Chapters 3 and 6. However, we did note in
      those chapters that certain operators—specifically, those selectors and THE_ operators that
      make use of the highly protected operators that expose physical representations—could not be
      defined entirely in D, since those protected operators are themselves not part of D. Further,
      we note that the ability to define operators in some other language leads to the possibility of
      writing programs in D that invoke operators provided by some third party (e.g., operators
      included in an off-the-shelf library package).

       We should add that we do not intend this prescription to undermine such matters as D’s
optimizability unduly. Nor do we intend it to be a recipe for the use of procedural constructs such
as loops to subvert the system’s support for declarative queries and the like. Rather, the point is that
computational completeness will be needed (in general) for the implementation of user-defined
operators anyway, and to be able to implement such operators in D itself might well be more
convenient than having to make excursions into some other language—excursions that in any case
are likely to cause problems for optimizers. We do recognize that it might prove necessary in
practice to prohibit the use of certain D features outside the code that implements such operators, so
long as such prohibitions do not too severely restrict what can be done by a free-standing
application (i.e., one that does not require invocation from some program written in some other
language).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    page 212
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                             Chapter 8 / OO Prescriptions


OO PRESCRIPTION 4: EXPLICIT TRANSACTION BOUNDARIES

Transaction initiation shall be performed only by means of an explicit “begin transaction”
operator. Transaction termination shall be performed only by means of a “commit” or “rollback”
operator; commit must always be explicit, but rollback can be implicit (if and only if the transaction
fails through no fault of its own). If transaction TX terminates with commit (“normal
termination”), changes made by TX to the applicable database shall be committed. If transaction
TX terminates with rollback (“abnormal termination”), changes made by TX to the applicable
database shall be rolled back.

                                        ———  ———

We require, noncontroversially, that all database operations be performed within the context of
some transaction; here we are simply trying once again to avoid certain mistakes we observe in the
design of SQL. To be specific:

    ■   Prior to 1999, the SQL standard had no explicit “begin transaction” operator; instead, a
        transaction was started implicitly whenever the application executed a “transaction-initiating”
        statement while no transaction was currently in progress.1 One consequence of this omission
        was that there was no obvious way to provide “transaction-wide” information—for example,
        isolation level [96]—that was specific to just one transaction. Of course, the Manifesto does
        not directly address isolation level or similar matters at all, but it does at least provide the
        explicit “begin transaction” operator that is needed as a basis for addressing them. (Perhaps
        we should add that, regarding isolation level specifically, the only level we would want to
        support—i.e., the only one we would regard as logically correct—would be whatever level is
        defined to provide total isolation; all others have the potential for causing logical mistakes.)

    ■   SQL allows transactions to terminate implicitly as well, in which case—to quote reference
        [41]—“the system ... automatically executes either a ROLLBACK or a COMMIT ... it is
        implementation-dependent which” (!). Note: The term implementation-dependent is defined
        by the SQL standard to mean “possibly differing between SQL-implementations, but not
        specified by this International Standard and not required to be specified ... for any particular
        SQL-implementation.” So whether the system executes a COMMIT or a ROLLBACK might
        not even be documented! It could even change from release to release.

      As for the explanations in this prescription of normal vs. abnormal termination: The objective
here is simply to spell out the fact that databases, and therefore relvars contained within databases,
possess the property of persistence. In fact, as indicated in our discussion of RM Prescription 16 in
Chapter 6, database relvars are the only variables to possess this property.




1
  An explicit START—not BEGIN—TRANSACTION operator was added in 1999, but its use is optional (it has to be,
because it still has to be possible for compatibility reasons to begin transactions implicitly as well).



Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        page 213
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                          Chapter 8 / OO Prescriptions


OO PRESCRIPTION 5: NESTED TRANSACTIONS

D shall support nested transactions—i.e., it shall permit a parent transaction TX to initiate a child
transaction TX' before TX itself has terminated, in which case:

 a.   TX and TX' shall interact with the same database (as is in fact required by RM Prescription
      17).

 b.   Whether TX shall be required to suspend execution while TX' executes shall be
      implementation defined. However, TX shall not be allowed to terminate before TX'
      terminates; in other words, TX' shall be wholly contained within TX.

 c.   Rollback of TX shall include the rolling back of TX' even if TX' has terminated with commit.
      In other words, “commit” is always interpreted within the parent context (if such exists) and
      is subject to override by the parent transaction (again, if such exists).

                                       ———  ———

The idea of nested transactions can be thought of as a generalization of the familiar notion of
savepoints [96]. Savepoints allow a transaction to be organized as a sequence of actions that can be
rolled back individually (loosely speaking); nesting, by contrast, allows a transaction to be
organized, recursively, as a hierarchy of such actions. In other words:

 ■    BEGIN TRANSACTION is extended to support subtransactions (i.e., if BEGIN
      TRANSACTION is issued when a transaction is already running, it starts a child transaction).

 ■    COMMIT “commits” but only within the relevant parent scope (if this transaction is a child).

 ■    ROLLBACK undoes work back to the start of this particular subtransaction (including
      children, grandchildren, etc., of this subtransaction, even if these latter transactions terminated
      with commit).

       Note that nested transactions will be awkward to implement—from a purely syntactic point of
view!—in a language that lacks an explicit BEGIN TRANSACTION statement (see the previous
prescription): There has to be some explicit way of indicating that an inner transaction is to be
started, and marking the point to roll back to if that inner transaction fails. Note further that (as our
earlier remarks indicate) we do explicitly require the syntax for beginning and ending an inner
transaction to be the same as that for beginning and ending an outermost transaction. This
requirement is in the interest of modular programming—an application should be able to begin a
transaction without having to know whether that transaction will be part of some outer transaction.


OO PRESCRIPTION 6: AGGREGATE OPERATORS AND EMPTY SETS

Let AggOp be an aggregate operator, such as SUM. If the argument to some given invocation of
AggOp happens to be empty, then:



Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 214
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                     Chapter 8 / OO Prescriptions


    a.   If AggOp is essentially just shorthand for some iterated scalar dyadic operator Op (the
         dyadic operator is “+” in the case of SUM), and if an identity value exists for Op (the identity
         value is 0 in the case of “+”), then the result of that invocation of AggOp shall be that
         identity value.

    b.   Otherwise, the result of that invocation of AggOp shall be undefined.

                                            ———  ———

The general concept of identity values was discussed under RM Prescription 10 in Chapter 6.
Identity values corresponding to the aggregate operators supported in Tutorial D are as follows:

    ■    AVG: None

    ■    COUNT, SUM: Zero

    ■    MAX, MIN: “Negative infinity” and “positive infinity,” respectively (where negative infinity
         and positive infinity refer to the lowest and highest value of the applicable—necessarily
         ordinal—type, respectively)1

    ■    AND: TRUE

    ■    OR and XOR: FALSE

    ■    EXACTLY: See below

    ■    UNION and D_UNION: An empty relation

    ■    INTERSECT: A universal relation

      EXACTLY is a special case, because it takes an additional argument (viz., a nonnegative
integer). Let that argument have value n. Then, if the aggregate argument is empty, the operator
returns TRUE if n is zero and FALSE otherwise.
      Incidentally, it is worth pointing out that COUNT can be regarded as a special case of SUM.
For example, the expression
         COUNT ( S )

is logically equivalent to this one:
         SUM ( EXTEND S ADD ( 1 AS ONE ), ONE )

      We remark that SQL satisfies OO Prescription 6 for COUNT but fails for everything else. To
be specific, for all of the aggregate operators it supports apart from COUNT, it defines the result of

1
  For certain data types (e.g., CHAR) where “positive infinity” is very large, the implementation might want to outlaw,
or at least flag, invocations of MIN on an empty set (if those invocations really need the result to be materialized).



Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                   page 215
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                          Chapter 8 / OO Prescriptions


applying the operator in question to an empty set to be null. In particular, it defines both the SUM
and the AVG of an empty set to be null.


EXERCISES

8.1    Why is compile-time type checking a good idea?

8.2    What do you understand by the term computational completeness?

8.3    What is a data sublanguage?

8.4    What do you understand by the term impedance mismatch?

8.5    OO Prescription 6 explains the effect of the aggregate operators on an empty set. What
       should the effect be in each case if the argument is a singleton set instead (i.e., a set of
       cardinality one)?

8.6    At least one commercially available product violates OO Prescription 5 by supporting
       autonomous subtransactions, meaning that a given child transaction can issue a “global
       commit” whose effects persist even if the corresponding parent transaction subsequently
       terminates with rollback. One purpose of such a feature is to allow an audit trail to be
       maintained that includes a record of failed transactions as well as successful ones.
       Discuss.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     page 216