                                             Chapter 9

                                   OO Proscriptions

OO PROSCRIPTION 1: RELVARS ARE NOT DOMAINS

Relvars are not domains.

                                      ———  ———

We first made this point in Chapter 2, in the subsection “Relvars vs. Types” at the end of the section
on relation variables. Briefly, a relvar is a variable; a domain is a type; variables are not types (and
types are not variables). In other words, we categorically reject the equation “relvar = class”
advocated in, e.g., references [102-103] (recall that types are often called classes in object systems).
But why might anyone advocate such an equation, anyway? It is instructive to consider this
question in detail. (The discussion that follows is based on one that previously appeared in
reference [76].)
      Consider the following simple “class” definition, expressed in a hypothetical object language:
      CREATE OBJECT CLASS EMP
           ( EMP#      CHAR(5),
             ENAME     CHAR(20),
             SAL       NUMERIC,
             HOBBY     CHAR(20),
             WORKS_FOR CHAR(20) ) ;

And now consider the following SQL “base table” definition:
      CREATE TABLE EMP
           ( EMP#      CHAR(5),
             ENAME     CHAR(20),
             SAL       NUMERIC,
             HOBBY     CHAR(20),
             WORKS_FOR CHAR(20) ) ;

      These two definitions certainly look very similar, and the idea of equating them thus looks
very tempting. And indeed some of the “object/relational” systems that appeared in the 1990s,
including some commercial products, effectively did just that. So let us take a closer look. More
precisely, let us take the CREATE TABLE statement just shown and consider a series of possible
extensions to it that, some have argued, serve to make it more “object like.” (The discussion that
follows is based on a specific product; in fact, it is based on an example in the vendor’s own
product documentation. We do not identify that product here, however, since it is not our intent in
this book to criticize or praise specific products. Rather, the criticisms we will be making apply,
mutatis mutandis, to any system that espouses the “relvar = class” equation.)
      The first extension is to permit composite attributes (i.e., attributes that are tuple valued).
More specifically, we allow attribute values within a given relvar to be tuples from some other




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         217
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                       Chapter 9 / OO Proscriptions


relvar, or possibly from the same relvar (?). This first extension is thus roughly analogous to
allowing objects to contain other objects, thereby supporting the containment hierarchy concept
[76]. In the example, we might replace the original CREATE TABLE statement by the following
collection of statements (refer to Fig. 9.1):
     CREATE TABLE EMP
          ( EMP#      CHAR(5),
            ENAME     CHAR(20),
            SAL       NUMERIC,
            HOBBY     ACTIVITY,
            WORKS_FOR COMPANY ) ;

     CREATE TABLE ACTIVITY
          ( NAME      CHAR(20),
            TEAM      INTEGER ) ;

     CREATE TABLE COMPANY
          ( NAME      CHAR(20),
            LOCATION CITYSTATE ) ;

     CREATE TABLE CITYSTATE
          ( CITY      CHAR(20),
            STATE     CHAR(2) ) ;

     ╔════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
     ║ EMP                                                            ║
     ║┌──────┬───────┬─────┬───────────────┬─────────────────────────┐║
     ║│ EMP# │ ENAME │ SAL │ HOBBY tuple   │ WORKS_FOR tuple         │║
     ║│      │       │     ├───────────────┼─────────────────────────┤║
     ║│      │       │     │┌──────┬──────┐│┌──────┬────────────────┐│║
     ║│      │       │     ││ NAME │ TEAM │││ NAME │ LOCATION tuple ││║
     ║│      │       │     │└──────┴──────┘││      ├────────────────┤│║
     ║│      │       │     │               ││      │┌──────┬───────┐││║
     ║│      │       │     │               ││      ││ CITY │ STATE │││║
     ║│      │       │     │               ││      │└──────┴───────┘││║
     ║│      │       │     │               │└──────┴────────────────┘│║
     ║└══════┴───────┴─────┴───────────────┴─────────────────────────┘║
     ╚════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
     Fig. 9.1: Attributes containing (pointers to) tuples—deprecated
      Explanation: Attribute HOBBY in relvar EMP is declared to be of type ACTIVITY.
ACTIVITY in turn is a relvar of two attributes, NAME and TEAM, where TEAM gives the number
of players in a team corresponding to NAME (e.g., if NAME = 'Soccer' then TEAM = 11). Each
HOBBY value is thus actually a tuple with two components, a NAME component and a TEAM
component (more precisely, it is a tuple that currently appears in relvar ACTIVITY). Observe,
therefore, that we have already violated OO Proscription 1—the “domain” for attribute HOBBY is
defined to be the relvar ACTIVITY. We will come back to this point later.
      Similarly, attribute WORKS_FOR in relvar EMP is declared to be of type COMPANY, and
COMPANY is also a relvar of two attributes, one of which is defined to be of type CITYSTATE,
which is another two-attribute relvar, and so on. In other words, relvars ACTIVITY, COMPANY,
and CITYSTATE are all considered to be types (domains) as well as relvars. The same is true for
relvar EMP itself, of course.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   218
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                Chapter 9 / OO Proscriptions


       As an aside, we remark that we have characterized this first extension as attributes containing
tuples because that is the way advocates of the “relvar = class” equation themselves characterize it.
It would be more accurate, however, to characterize it as “attributes containing pointers to tuples”—
an issue we will examine more closely in a few moments, and more closely still in the next section.
(In Fig. 9.1, therefore, we should really replace each of the three occurrences of the term tuple by
the term pointer to tuple.)
       Remarks analogous to those of the previous paragraph apply to the second extension also,
which is to allow relation-valued attributes; that is, attribute values within a given relvar are
allowed to be, not just single tuples, but sets of tuples from some other relvar, or possibly from the
same relvar (?). This second extension is thus roughly analogous to allowing objects to contain
“collection” objects [76]—a more complex version of the containment hierarchy. (We remark in
passing that in the particular product on which our example is based, those collection objects can be
sequences or bags as well as sets per se.) For example, suppose employees can have an arbitrary
number of hobbies, instead of just one (refer to Fig. 9.2):
      CREATE TABLE EMP
           ( EMP#      CHAR(5),
             ENAME     CHAR(20),
             SAL       NUMERIC,
             HOBBIES   SET OF ( ACTIVITY ),
             WORKS_FOR COMPANY ) ;

      ╔═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
      ║ EMP                                                               ║
      ║┌──────┬───────┬─────┬──────────────────┬─────────────────────────┐║
      ║│ EMP# │ ENAME │ SAL │ HOBBIES relation │ WORKS_FOR tuple         │║
      ║│      │       │     ├──────────────────┼─────────────────────────┤║
      ║│      │       │     │ ┌──────┬──────┐ │┌──────┬────────────────┐│║
      ║│      │       │     │ │ NAME │ TEAM │ ││ NAME │ LOCATION tuple ││║
      ║│      │       │     │ └══════┴──────┘ ││       ├────────────────┤│║
      ║│      │       │     │                  ││      │┌──────┬───────┐││║
      ║│      │       │     │                  ││      ││ CITY │ STATE │││║
      ║│      │       │     │                  ││      │└──────┴───────┘││║
      ║│      │       │     │                  │└──────┴────────────────┘│║
      ║└══════┴───────┴─────┴──────────────────┴─────────────────────────┘║
      ╚═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
      Fig. 9.2: Attributes containing sets of (pointers to) tuples—deprecated
     Explanation: The HOBBIES value within any given tuple of relvar EMP is now,
conceptually, a set of zero or more tuples from relvar ACTIVITY.
     The third extension is to permit relvars to have associated methods (i.e., operators). For
example:
      CREATE TABLE EMP
           ( EMP#      CHAR(5),
             ENAME     CHAR(20),
             SAL       NUMERIC,
             HOBBIES   SET OF ( ACTIVITY ),
             WORKS_FOR COMPANY )
      METHOD RETIREMENT_BENEFITS ( ) : NUMERIC ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            219
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                  Chapter 9 / OO Proscriptions


     Explanation: RETIREMENT_BENEFITS is a method that takes a given EMP tuple as its
argument and produces a result of type NUMERIC.
       So much for a quick overview of how the “relvar = class” equation might be realized in
practice.1 So what is wrong with it? Well, observe immediately that, as noted earlier, a relvar is a
variable and a class is a type; so how can they possibly be the same? This first observation should
be logically sufficient to stop the “relvar = class” idea dead in its tracks. However, there is more
that can usefully be said, so let us continue for a while.
       Observe next, then, that there is a difference in kind—a logical difference, in fact—between
the attribute definitions (e.g.) SAL NUMERIC and WORKS_FOR COMPANY. NUMERIC is a
true data type; it places a time-independent constraint on the values that can legally appear in
attribute SAL. By contrast, COMPANY is not a true data type; the constraint it places on the values
that can appear in attribute WORKS_FOR is time dependent (it depends, obviously, on the current
value of relvar COMPANY). In fact, as pointed out earlier, the relvar vs. domain distinction has
been muddied here.
       Next, we have seen that tuple “objects” are apparently allowed to contain other such
“objects”; for example, EMP “objects” apparently contain COMPANY “objects.” But they do
not—not really; instead, they contain pointers to those “contained objects,” and users must be
absolutely clear on this fact. For example, suppose the user updates some particular COMPANY
tuple in some way (refer back to Fig. 9.1). Then that update will immediately be visible in all EMP
tuples that “contain” that COMPANY tuple. (Please understand that we are not saying this effect is
undesirable, only that it has to be explained to the user. But explaining it to the user amounts to
telling the user that the “model” shown in Fig. 9.1 is incorrect—EMP tuples do not contain
COMPANY tuples, they contain pointers to COMPANY tuples instead, as already stated.)
       Here are some further implications and questions arising from this same point:

    ■   Can we insert an EMP tuple and specify a value for the “contained” COMPANY tuple that
        does not currently exist in the COMPANY relvar? If the answer is yes, the fact that attribute
        WORKS_FOR is defined as being of type COMPANY does not mean very much, since it
        does not significantly constrain the INSERT operation in any way. If the answer is no, the
        INSERT operation becomes unnecessarily complex—the user has to specify, not just an
        existing company name (i.e., a foreign key value) as would be required in the analogous
        relational situation, but an entire existing COMPANY tuple. Moreover, specifying an entire
        COMPANY tuple means, at best, telling the system something it already knows; at worst, it
        means that if the user makes a mistake, the INSERT will fail when it could perfectly well
        have succeeded.

    ■   Suppose we want an ON DELETE RESTRICT rule for companies (i.e., an attempt to delete a
        company must fail if the company has any employees). Presumably this rule must be
        enforced by procedural code, say by some method M (note that relvar EMP has no foreign key
        to which a declarative version of the rule might be attached). Furthermore, regular DELETE


1
  The product on which our example is based goes a lot further than we have suggested—for example, it also supports
“subtables and supertables” (see Appendix G)—but the extensions we have discussed so far are sufficient for present
purposes.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     220
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 9 / OO Proscriptions


      operations must now not be performed on relvar COMPANY other than within the code that
      implements that method M. How is this requirement enforced? Analogous remarks and
      questions apply to other foreign key rules, of course, such as ON DELETE CASCADE.

 ■    Note too that deleting an EMP tuple presumably will not cascade to delete the corresponding
      COMPANY tuple, despite the pretense that the EMP tuple contains that COMPANY tuple.

       Next, suppose we define view V to be the projection of EMP over (say) just the attribute
HOBBIES. V is a relvar too, of course, but a virtual relvar instead of a real one. So if “relvar =
class” is a correct equation, V is also a class. What class is it? Also, classes have methods; what
methods apply to V?
       Well, “class” EMP has just one method, RETIREMENT_BENEFITS, and that method clearly
does not apply to “class” V. In fact, it hardly seems reasonable that any methods that apply to
“class” EMP would apply to “class” V—and there certainly are no others. So it looks as if (in
general) no methods at all apply to the result of a projection; i.e., the result, whatever it is, is not
really a class after all. In fact, it is clear that when people equate relvars and classes, it is
specifically real relvars they have in mind—they are forgetting about the virtual ones. (Certainly
the pointers discussed above are pointers to tuples in real relvars, not derived ones.) But to
distinguish between real and virtual relvars in this way is a serious mistake, because the question as
to which relvars are real and which virtual is (as we have explained elsewhere) to some
considerable degree arbitrary.
       Finally, what domains are supported? Those who advocate the “relvar = class” equation
never seem to have much to say about domains, presumably because they cannot see how domains
as such fit into their overall scheme—and yet domains are essential, as we know. What is more, the
“relvar = class” equation merely gives us an alternative way of doing things we can already do with
regular relvars; it does not provide support for user-defined types in general (consider, for example,
how the scheme sketched above might be used to implement QTY, POINT, and all of the other
examples of user-defined types discussed in Chapter 6 under RM Prescription 1).
       You might also like to consider the following question: If the tuples of a certain relvar
represent “objects” of some “class”—meaning in particular that the content of that “class” varies
over time—what term is used for the set of all possible “objects” that might ever appear in that
“class” (i.e., at any time)?
       It follows from all of the above that we are not talking about the relational model any more.
In particular, the fundamental data construct is no longer a relation containing values, it is a
“relation”—actually not a proper relation at all, so far as the relational model is concerned—
containing values and pointers. In other words, we have undermined the conceptual integrity of
the relational model (see Chapter 1).
       As a kind of footnote to the foregoing discussion, it is interesting to speculate on what would
have happened if Codd had not originally used the term domain instead of data type, and the object
community had not then introduced the term object class for the same concept. When the
requirement arose for users to be able to define their own data types, the only possible term that
could have been used to refer to those types would surely have been user-defined data types—and
any proposal to support such things in a manner that suggested they were not data types would thus
surely have been open to well-founded criticism.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         221
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                      Chapter 9 / OO Proscriptions


OO PROSCRIPTION 2: NO OBJECT IDS

No database relvar shall include an attribute of type pointer.

                                             ———  ———

As we saw in the previous section, a system that violates OO Proscription 1 will almost certainly
violate OO Proscription 2 as well. However, it is possible—and, sadly, not at all unusual in
practice—to violate OO Prescription 2 without violating OO Proscription 1, so it is worth
discussing OO Proscription 2 in its own right.
       We begin by taking an informal look at the idea, mentioned a couple of times in the previous
section, that some relvar R2 might have an attribute whose values are pointers to tuples in some
relvar R1. Why might anyone want to do such a thing? The answer seems to be bound up with
performance; the argument, such as it is, is that it is quicker to follow a pointer than to do a join. Of
course, to argue thus is to confuse model and implementation issues once again; nevertheless, it is
an argument that is frequently heard.
       Observe now, however, that—by definition!—pointers point to variables, not values (because
variables have addresses and values do not). By definition, therefore, if some relvar is allowed to
have an attribute whose values are “pointers to tuples,” then those pointers point to tuple variables,
not to tuple values. But there is no notion of a tuple variable in the relational model. The
relational model deals with relation values, which are (loosely speaking) sets of tuple values, which
are in turn (again loosely speaking) sets of scalar values. It also deals with relation variables, which
are variables whose values are relations. However, it does not deal with tuple variables (which are
variables whose values are tuples) or scalar variables (which are variables whose values are
scalars).1 The only kind of variable included in the relational model—and the only kind of variable
permitted in a relational database—is, very specifically, the relation variable. It follows that a
violation of OO Proscription 2 constitutes a major departure from the relational model, introducing
as it does an entirely new kind of variable (thereby violating The Information Principle, in fact). As
noted in the previous section, in fact, we would argue that it seriously undermines the conceptual
integrity of the relational model.
       The foregoing argument has many implications, far too many to elaborate on here; more detail
can be found in reference [59] if you are interested. We content ourselves in the remainder of this
section with a slightly more formal look at OO Proscription 2 per se.
       First of all, then, we need to be clear about the distinction between pointers and names.
Following reference [125], we can distinguish these concepts as follows:

    ■   A name is a character string.2 Names are labels or identifiers that are attached to program
        objects (typically variables) and are used to identify those objects symbolically.



1
  And it certainly does not deal with tuple variables that are somehow “contained in” some relation variable, since (as
noted at the end of the section on RM Prescription 13 in Chapter 6) this latter is a notion that makes no sense.
2
  We do not mean to suggest that a name is a value of type CHAR; more particularly, we do not mean to suggest that a
name can be denoted by some expression of type CHAR in the language D.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                         222
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                    Chapter 9 / OO Proscriptions


    ■   A pointer is an address. Like names, pointers are used to identify program objects (typically
        variables), but they do so, not symbolically as names do, but by the location of those objects.

      So we see that names and pointers are both used to refer to or reference variables (among
other things); the intuitive difference between them is that names are externally visible, while
pointers are not—the latter are, to repeat, addresses. Of course, we are speaking here purely from a
conceptual point of view—the addresses in question are not necessarily direct hardware addresses;
the point is, however, they can always be thought of as direct hardware addresses.
      Now, the source of the pointer notion is, of course, the fact that the concept of a variable is
really an abstraction of the concept of an area of storage, implying that variables do indeed have
addresses. Programming languages thus often support address or pointer values and variables (in
other words, they support an address or pointer type). Hence, to repeat, a pointer value is an
address, and a pointer variable is a variable whose permitted values are addresses.
      The address or pointer type has two fundamental operations associated with it, usually called
referencing and dereferencing, respectively:1

    ■   Referencing: Given a variable V, the referencing operator applied to V returns the address of
        V. Note that—even though the operator is read-only!—the argument V must be specified as a
        variable reference specifically, not as a literal or more general expression (probably not even
        as a pseudovariable reference). The reason is, of course, that values do not have addresses,
        variables do (recall from Chapter 1 that values have no location in time or space, while
        variables do).

    ■   Dereferencing: Given a variable A of type address, the dereferencing operator applied to A
        returns the variable whose address is currently contained in A. Note carefully that the
        operator returns a variable, not a value. The reason is, again, that values do not have
        addresses, variables do. (Of course, if the dereferencing operator invocation occurs in a
        source position instead of a target position—in particular, if it occurs on the right side of an
        assignment—it can be regarded, harmlessly, as returning the value of the variable in question
        instead of returning that variable per se.)

       Now, object systems rely heavily on the concept of object IDs, and object IDs are essentially
pointers as just described. OO Proscription 2 thus means that we reject the notion of object IDs, at
least insofar as such IDs might be permitted within databases.2 As a consequence, we also reject
both:

    ■   The notion that certain database objects might make use of such IDs in order to reference—
        and, in particular, to share—other such objects


1
  SQL is unusual in that it has a dereferencing operator—it might even be said to have two different dereferencing
operators—but no referencing operator. Furthermore, those dereferencing operators are unusual too, in that they return
values, not variables. See references [59] and [76] for further explanation.
2
  As noted under RM Proscription 1 in Chapter 7, we also reject the concept of hidden “tuple IDs” (some writers seem
to equate that concept with object IDs—see, e.g., the annotation to reference [130]).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       223
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                         Chapter 9 / OO Proscriptions


 ■    The notion that users might have to dereference such IDs, either explicitly or implicitly, in
      order to access such objects

      In fact, we reject the notion of objects (in the special sense in which that term is understood in
object systems, as opposed to its normal natural language sense) entirely.
      Perhaps we should stress the point that OO Proscription 2 does not prohibit support for
pointers in the nondatabase portions of D. We do note, however, that pointers, even if limited to the
nondatabase portions of D, can lead to a serious problem if type inheritance is also supported (see
Appendix F).
      We should also stress the fact that OO Proscription 2 does not prevent database relvars from
having attributes whose values are names (in particular, names of variables) instead of addresses.
For example, a database relvar might reasonably have an attribute whose values are (say) “operating
system file names” or “database relvar names.” Indeed, relvars with attributes whose values are
database relvar names will certainly be needed in the catalog. To what extent D should provide any
corresponding dereferencing operators is a question that requires further study, however; in
Tutorial D we adopt the conservative position that no such operators are provided at all. The
following observations are pertinent:

 ■    First of all, a type whose values are names of variables does logically resemble, somewhat, a
      type whose values are pointers. If we permit such types, therefore, we run the risk of
      backsliding into the kind of pointer free-for-all found in prerelational systems—with its
      attendant looping, and pointer-chasing, and lack of proper end user access, and so on and so
      forth—and that state of affairs is definitely something we want to avoid.

 ■    On the other hand, we cannot prevent users from defining a type whose values are variable
      names. And perhaps there is no need to. For consider:

      ●   The only variables D allows within the database are, very specifically, database relvars.
          Hence, the only “pointers” to database data that might be allowed in D are, very
          specifically, database relvar names.

      ●   As far as data in the database is concerned, therefore, the only kind of dereferencing D
          might possibly need is an operation that would allow a database relvar to be specified, not
          directly by means of its name, but indirectly by means of a variable whose value is that
          name. In SQL terms, for example, such a facility might mean that, in place of the
          familiar SELECT * FROM T, the user would be able to say SELECT * FROM V, where
          V is a program variable whose value is the required name T.

      ●   As far as data in the database is concerned, therefore, support in D for “pointers” and
          dereferencing would not constitute a return to the kind of pointer free-for-all mentioned
          (and objected to) above.

 ■    The foregoing remarks notwithstanding, we do not (to repeat) prescribe any such explicit
      dereferencing operator for D. Indeed, we observe that if D were to support a mechanism akin
      to the PREPARE and EXECUTE capabilities of “dynamic SQL” or (perhaps better) the




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           224
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                                     Chapter 9 / OO Proscriptions


      analogous Prepare and Execute capabilities of the SQL Call-Level Interface [41,99], explicit
      dereferencing as such would be unnecessary anyway. (For the benefit of readers who might
      not be familiar with these SQL features, we should explain that PREPARE or Prepare allows
      a source language statement—possibly a dynamically constructed source language
      statement—to be compiled at run time, and EXECUTE or Execute then allows the compiled
      version of such a statement to be executed. We remark that, as hinted in Chapter 1, an
      industrial strength D would certainly require some such mechanism in order to allow the
      construction of applications that support ad hoc interactions on the part of the end user.)

       We observe in conclusion that the heavy reliance of object systems on object IDs lends weight
to our belief that such systems are designed primarily by programmers for programmers. The
relational model, by contrast, explicitly recognizes that the primary purpose of databases is to serve
end users rather than application programmers (though this objective does not rule out the
possibility of their serving application programmers too, of course). For this very reason, Codd
deliberately excluded pointers from the relational model when he first defined it. Here is his stated
rationale for doing so [23]:
      It is safe to assume that all kinds of users [including end users in particular] understand the act of comparing
      values, but that relatively few understand the complexities of pointers [including the complexities of referencing
      and dereferencing in particular]. The relational model is based on this fundamental principle ... [The]
      manipulation of pointers is more bug-prone than is the act of comparing values, even if the user happens to
      understand the complexities of pointers.

        It is thus sad to see that the SQL standard now permits—in fact, encourages—the use of
pointers within “relations” (“relations” in quotes because those “relations” are in fact not relations
at all, in the sense of the relational model). And the pointers in question are, of course, not mere
database relvar names as above but genuine “object ID”-style pointers. This is backsliding with a
vengeance.


EXERCISES

9.1    Distinguish as carefully as you can between names and pointers.

9.2    Explain the referencing and dereferencing operators. In what respects are these operators
       rather unusual?

9.3    If you are familiar with SQL, repeat Exercise 9.2 for the SQL versions of the operators in
       question.

9.4    Explain the concept of object IDs in your own words. Compare and contrast them with (a)
       the concept of surrogate keys, (b) the concept of “row IDs” or “tuple IDs.”

9.5    What are the reasons typically given in practice for violating OO Proscription 1? What
       about OO Proscription 2?




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                         225
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                       Chapter 9 / OO Proscriptions


9.6    Why does a violation of OO Proscription 1 seem to lead inevitably to a violation of OO
       Proscription 2?

9.7    What do you understand by the term “containment hierarchy”? What if anything is the
       analog of that concept in the relational world?

9.8    What do you understand by the term “collection object”? What if anything is the analog of
       that concept in the relational world?

9.9    Why does a violation of OO Proscription 2 constitute a violation of The Information
       Principle? What are the consequences of such violation?

9.10   What do you understand by the SQL terms Prepare and Execute? Why are such features
       desirable?

9.11   Why do you think OO Proscriptions 1 and 2 are not included in Chapter 7? Are they not
       both logical consequences of the relational model and thus in fact RM Proscriptions?

9.12   Attempt to implement user-defined types POINT and ELLIPSE (from Chapter 6) in the style
       of the “data types” ACTIVITY and COMPANY of the HOBBY and WORKS_FOR
       attributes shown in Fig. 9.1. Given that implementation, describe how you think the effect
       of the following Tutorial D assignment might be obtained:
       THE_X ( THE_CTR ( E ) ) := 5.0 ;

       (where E is a variable of declared type ELLIPSE).

9.13   The term data type was in widespread use in the computer programming world of 1970.
       Why do you think Codd chose the term domain for that concept in his relational model of
       data? What, if any, adverse consequences have arisen from that choice of term? Why are
       object classes called object classes and not (data) types? What, if any, adverse
       consequences have arisen from that choice of term?

9.14   “Types are to nouns as relations are to ...”: Complete this sentence.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     226