                                              Chapter 10

                        RM Very Strong Suggestions


RM VERY STRONG SUGGESTION 1: SYSTEM KEYS

D should provide a mechanism according to which values of some specified candidate key (or
certain components thereof) for some specified relvar are supplied by the system. It should also
provide a mechanism according to which an arbitrary relation can be extended to include an
attribute whose values (a) are unique within that relation (or within certain partitions of that
relation), and (b) are once again supplied by the system.

                                        ———  ———

Caveat: We should make it clear at the outset here that RM Very Strong Suggestion 1 raises a
number of issues (including but not limited to language design issues) that are not yet fully
resolved. The discussion that follows should therefore be regarded not as a definitive statement, but
rather just as notes toward the kind of functionality we feel is desirable. Note that the functionality
in question is not currently included in Tutorial D, though we do believe it would be useful in an
industrial-strength language.
        With that caveat out of the way, we now observe that (as the text of the suggestion indicates)
we are really talking about two separate but related ideas here. We begin with the familiar notion of
default values, which we explain as follows. Let R be a relvar, and let R have an attribute A of
declared type T. If attribute A is defined to have default value d (a value of type T, of course), then
it is at least syntactically valid to specify tuples—more precisely, relations containing tuples—for
insertion into R that do not include an explicit A component; such tuples are conceptually extended
with an <A,T,d> triple before the actual insertion is done. For example, suppose attribute STATUS
of the suppliers relvar S is defined to have default value 10, perhaps as follows (hypothetical
syntax):
      VAR S REAL RELATION { S#     S#,
                            SNAME NAME,
                            STATUS INTEGER,
                            CITY   CHAR }
                          KEY { S# }
                          DEFAULT { STATUS 10 } ;

Then the following INSERT might be syntactically valid:
        INSERT S RELATION { TUPLE { S#    S#('S6'),
                                    SNAME NAME('Lopez'),
                                    CITY 'Madrid' } } ;

The relation that is actually inserted looks like this:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        227
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                      Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


         RELATION { TUPLE { S#     S#('S6'),
                            SNAME NAME('Lopez'),
                            STATUS 10,
                            CITY   'Madrid' } }

An assignment analog of the foregoing INSERT might look as follows:
         S := S UNION RELATION { TUPLE { S#     S#('S6'),
                                         SNAME NAME('Lopez'),
                                         STATUS DEFAULT ( S, STATUS ),
                                         CITY   'Madrid' } } ;

We are assuming here that the operator invocation DEFAULT (R,a) returns the default value of the
specified attribute a (STATUS in the example) of the relvar denoted by the specified relvar
reference R (S in the example).
      Next, we suggest an extension to the foregoing mechanism according to which default values
are provided by invoking some system-defined operator, instead of being defined explicitly as part
of the attribute definition. For example, let relvar READING contain a set of instrument readings
taken during the course of some experiment. Further, let that relvar include an attribute called
READING#, defined as follows:
        READING# INTEGER
         ...
        DEFAULT { READING# SERIAL () }

        SERIAL here is the name of a system-defined operator, with semantics as follows:

    ■   Let the very first INSERT into the READING relvar insert n tuples. Then those tuples will be
        given READING# values 1, 2, ..., n (in some unspecified order).

    ■   Let some subsequent INSERT into the READING relvar insert p tuples. Then those tuples
        will be given READING# values N+1, N+2, ..., N+p (in some unspecified order), where N is
        the highest READING# value previously assigned.1

       For simplicity, we assume—though the assumption is perhaps not 100 percent necessary—
that if SERIAL or other such operator is specified, then the attribute in question must obtain its
values via the default mechanism; i.e., “the attribute is nonupdatable” (again, speaking somewhat
loosely). We also assume that a means exists for a suitably skilled and authorized user (perhaps the
database administrator) to define such operators. Observe that those operators will probably not be
conventional scalar operators in the sense of RM Prescription 3. For one thing, they might require
access to certain “environment variables” (e.g., the system clock) that might not be directly
available to a conventional user of D. For another, they will typically involve, and might even


1
  We remark that these READING# values might be thought of as tuple IDs; note, however, that those tuple IDs are not
hidden from the user, as they are in certain SQL systems. We point out too that there is an element of unpredictability
involved in using the SERIAL operator. For example, if we insert (a relation containing) three tuples into an empty
relvar, all in a single operation, we cannot say which tuple gets which ID—we know only that they get IDs 1, 2, and 3 in
some unspecified order.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        228
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations             Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


update, certain “hidden arguments” (i.e., arguments not mentioned explicitly when the operator is
invoked); for example, one hidden argument to SERIAL is the highest value previously assigned.
      Here now are some examples of further operators that could be useful in appropriate
circumstances:

 ■    SERIAL within some scope: For example, the relvar ORDER_LINE might include an
      ORDER# attribute whose values are provided by some business process, together with a
      LINE# attribute of type INTEGER with a default value defined thus:
      DEFAULT { LINE# SERIAL () WITHIN ORDER# }

 ■    NOW: This operator provides “the time now” (perhaps as a time or timestamp value, perhaps
      as an integer, perhaps as a character string, depending on the type of the attribute in question).

 ■    USERID: This operator provides the user ID of the user inserting the tuples in question.

      To get back to RM Very Strong Suggestion 1 specifically, the relevance of all of the above to
candidate keys should be obvious. For example, the complete definition of the ORDER_LINE
relvar might look like this:
       VAR ORDER_LINE REAL RELATION { ORDER# CHAR,
                                      LINE# INTEGER,
                                      ITEM# CHAR,
                                      QTY    QTY,
                                      ........ }
                           KEY { ORDER#, LINE# }
                           DEFAULT { LINE# SERIAL () WITHIN ORDER# } ;

       We turn now to the second principal part of RM Very Strong Suggestion 1. The basic idea is
as follows: We would like to be able to tag the tuples of the result of an arbitrary relational
expression in such a way that the tuples remain distinct from one another, even if we “project away”
the attribute(s) that would otherwise have made them so. Such a feature would be useful in our
proposed support for SQL migration (see the discussion of RM Very Strong Suggestion 8 later in
this chapter).
       Now, you can probably see right away that we might be able to achieve the foregoing effect if
we were allowed to invoke operators like SERIAL just as if they were ordinary scalar operators—in
EXTEND, for example. The trouble is, however, that (as already noted) they are not ordinary scalar
operators, because they typically involve certain hidden arguments. Instead, therefore, we suggest
the introduction of a new relational operator, TAG. Here is an example of its use:
      ( SP TAG WITHIN { S# } AS P#_SERIAL ) { ALL BUT P# }

      Given our usual sample data, one possible result of evaluating this expression is shown in Fig.
10.1. (The result is not unique, in general, because TAG, like SERIAL, involves some degree of
unpredictability. However, we do require that such results be repeatable; that is, if x is an
expression, we require that x always return the same output given the same input, even if it involves
an invocation of TAG.)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         229
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations             Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                    ┌────┬─────┬───────────┐                     ║
║                    │ S# │ QTY │ P#_SERIAL │                     ║
║                    ├════┼─────┼═══════════┤                     ║
║                    │ S1 │ 300 │         1 │                     ║
║                    │ S1 │ 200 │         5 │                     ║
║                    │ S1 │ 400 │         3 │                     ║
║                    │ S1 │ 200 │         4 │                     ║
║                    │ S1 │ 100 │         6 │                     ║
║                    │ S1 │ 100 │         2 │                     ║
║                    │ S2 │ 300 │         1 │                     ║
║                    │ S2 │ 400 │         2 │                     ║
║                    │ S3 │ 200 │         1 │                     ║
║                    │ S4 │ 200 │         3 │                     ║
║                    │ S4 │ 300 │         1 │                     ║
║                    │ S4 │ 400 │         2 │                     ║
║                    └────┴─────┴───────────┘                     ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 10.1: TAG example: one possible result

       Explanation: The TAG operation tags tuples of the relation resulting from evaluation of a
specified relational expression (the relational expression in the example is just SP, and so the
resulting relation is simply the current value of relvar SP, of course). The specification WITHIN
{S#} means those tags are to be unique within distinct S# values (and we assume for simplicity that
they start from one for each such S# value; of course, we could extend the definition of the TAG
operator to allow the user to specify a different starting value). Thus, the overall result of the TAG
operation in the example has attributes S#, P#, QTY, and P#_SERIAL (this last one due to the AS
P#_SERIAL specification). We then “project away” the P# attribute to obtain a result such as that
shown in Fig. 10.1. Note that the cardinality of the projection is necessarily the same as that of SP,
whereas the same would not be true, in general, if we did not retain the P#_SERIAL attribute.
       We remark finally that TAG could be useful in situations in which sensitive information
needs to be concealed from certain users. For example, suppose we are given an employees relvar
EMP, with attributes EMP# and SALARY. Then the expression
      ( EMP TAG AS EMP_TAG ) { EMP_TAG, SALARY }

could be used as the basis for defining a virtual relvar that would permit statistical analysis to be
done on employee salaries without revealing exactly who earns what (in effect, the expression
replaces employee numbers by tags).


RM VERY STRONG SUGGESTION 2: FOREIGN KEYS

D should include some declarative shorthand for expressing referential constraints (also known as
foreign key constraints). [This VSS was later deleted].

                                       ———  ———

RM Prescription 23 requires support for the definition (and of course enforcement) of database
constraints of potentially arbitrary complexity. And since a referential constraint is really just a




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                             230
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                     Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


special case of such a constraint, it must of course be capable of formulation in terms of the support
provided under RM Prescription 23. Here, for example, is a Tutorial D formulation (repeated from
Chapter 2) of the referential constraint from shipments to suppliers:
        CONSTRAINT DBC5 SP { S# }  S { S# } ;

     RM Very Strong Suggestion 2 simply recognizes that it might be desirable to provide some
more user-friendly special-case syntax for such constraints. For example:
        VAR S    REAL RELATION { S# S#, ... } KEY { S# } ;

        VAR SP REAL RELATION { S# S#, ... } KEY { S#, P# }
                    FOREIGN KEY { S# } REFERENCES S ;

        By way of a second example, consider the following:
        VAR EMP REAL RELATION { EMP# EMP#, ..., MGR# EMP#, ... } KEY { EMP# }
            FOREIGN KEY { MGR# } REFERENCES EMP { EMP# } ;1

      Here attribute MGR# represents the employee number of the manager of the employee
identified by EMP#, and the foreign key specification is shorthand for a CONSTRAINT statement
of the form:
        CONSTRAINT ... EMP { MGR# }  EMP { EMP# } RENAME ( EMP# AS MGR# ) ;

Note the need to do some attribute renaming in this example.
      Special casing such as the foregoing does at least provide explicit syntax for a pragmatically
important concept, foreign key, that is not otherwise mentioned in the Manifesto (or in Tutorial D,
come to that). It also provides a place to attach declarative specifications of certain referential
actions—cascade delete, etc.—if such specifications are considered desirable, without necessarily
having to get into the business of supporting triggered procedures in full generality. Note: The fact
that we can update several relvars “simultaneously,” using multiple assignment, implies that there is
no logical need to support such referential actions. However, there are good usability and
productivity arguments in favor of providing such support, and we certainly do not preclude it—
though it would be remiss of us not to point out that (as noted, rather obliquely, in Chapter 3) it does
have the potential to violate The Assignment Principle.
      We close this section with a few miscellaneous observations:

    ■   Note that we allow foreign keys to reference any candidate key, instead of—as historically—
        requiring them to reference a primary key specifically. In fact, for reasons explained in
        Chapters 2 and 6, we do not prescribe any explicit support at all for primary keys as such
        (though we do not prohibit them either).

    ■   Referential constraints are usually thought of as applying to real relvars only. In the
        Manifesto, by contrast, we regard them as applying to virtual relvars as well.

1
 This example is regretted. The failure to match on attribute names implies a dependency on attribute name ordering in
composite foreign keys. See Chapter 13, “Inclusion Dependencies and Foreign Keys”, in Database Explorations.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                      231
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations            Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


 ■    It is possible—though good design practice might militate against it—for two distinct relvars
      R1 and R2 each to involve a foreign key that references the other. Such a possibility suggests
      that we might need something akin to multiple assignment for data definition operations also
      (for otherwise it might not be possible to define R1 until R2 has been defined and vice versa).


RM VERY STRONG SUGGESTION 3: CANDIDATE KEY INFERENCE

Let RX be a relational expression. By definition, RX can be thought of as designating a relvar, R
say—either a user-defined relvar (if RX is just a relvar name) or a system-defined relvar
(otherwise). It is desirable, though not always entirely feasible, for the system to be able to infer
the candidate keys of R, such that (among other things):

 a.   If RX constitutes the defining expression for some virtual relvar R', then those inferred
      candidate keys can be checked for consistency with the candidate keys explicitly defined for R'
      and—assuming no conflict—become candidate keys for R'.

 b.   Those inferred candidate keys can be included in the information about R that is made
      available (in response to a “metaquery”) to a user of D.

D should provide such functionality, but without any guarantee (a) that such inferred candidate
keys are not proper supersets of actual candidate keys, or (b) that such an inferred candidate key is
discovered for every actual candidate key.

                                      ———  ———

If K is a candidate key for relvar R, it follows from the definitions of candidate key and functional
dependency (see Chapter 2) that:

 ■    Because of the uniqueness property, the functional dependency (FD) K  A holds for every
      attribute A of R.

 ■    Because of the irreducibility property, there is no proper subset K' of K such that the FD K' 
      A holds for every attribute A of R.

By way of example, let R be the shipments relvar SP and K its sole key {S#,P#}. Then:

 ■    It is the case that every attribute of SP is functionally dependent on the combination of
      attributes {S#,P#}.

 ■    It is not the case that every attribute of SP is functionally dependent on some proper subset of
      that combination of attributes; to be specific, QTY is not. (By contrast, S# and P# both are,
      trivially, thanks to the trivial FDs {S#}  {S#} and {P#}  {P#}. An FD is trivial if the
      right side is a subset of the left side.)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        232
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations             Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


       It follows from the foregoing that, if we know the FDs that hold for a given relvar, we can
determine the keys for that relvar—they are, precisely, those irreducible combinations K of
attributes such that the FD K  A holds for every attribute A of the relvar in question. Hence, in
order to determine the keys for the result of some relational expression RX, we need to determine
the corresponding FDs. In other words, we need an FD inference mechanism, which—assuming we
know the FDs that hold in the base or real relvars—will let us infer the FDs that hold in the result of
evaluating an arbitrary expression involving those real relvars. (And, of course, we do know the
FDs that hold in the real relvars, because they will have been defined as constraints on the relvars in
question.) Such an inference mechanism is presented in reference [28]. See also reference [108].
       We remark that key inference is in fact a special case of constraint inference in general,
support for which is required by RM Prescription 23. We mention keys explicitly here because of
their pragmatic importance, and also because it might be desirable to use the special-case
inferencing mechanism described in reference [28] instead of a more general mechanism that works
for all constraints. As noted in our discussion of RM Prescription 23 in Chapter 6, however, there
are known to be intrinsic limits on the degree to which such inferencing might be feasible in
practice, which is why we allow for both of the following possibilities:

 ■    The inference mechanism might in fact find proper superkeys rather than true candidate keys.
      (Recall from Chapter 2 that a superkey is a superset of a key; in other words, a superkey
      satisfies the uniqueness property but not necessarily the irreducibility property. A proper
      superkey is a superkey that definitely does not satisfy the irreducibility property.)

 ■    Also, the inference mechanism might fail to discover certain keys entirely.

Implementations can thus compete with one another over their degree of success at inferring keys.


RM VERY STRONG SUGGESTION 4: TRANSITION CONSTRAINTS

D should support transition constraints—i.e., constraints on the transitions that a given database
can make from one value to another.

                                       ———  ———

Here is an example (“no supplier’s status must ever decrease”):
       CONSTRAINT TRC1 IS_EMPTY
                  ( ( ( S' { S#, STATUS } RENAME ( STATUS AS STATUS' ) )
                      JOIN
                      ( S { S#, STATUS } ) )
                    WHERE STATUS' > STATUS ) ;

Explanation: We introduce the convention that a primed relvar name, such as S' in the example, is
understood to refer to the corresponding relvar as it was prior to the update under consideration.
The constraint in the example can thus be understood as follows: If (a) we join together (over
supplier numbers) the relation that is the value of relvar S before the update and the relation that is
the value afterwards, and (b) we pick out the tuples in that join for which the old status value is




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         233
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations             Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


greater than the new one, then (c) the final result must be empty. (Since the join is over supplier
numbers, any tuple in the result of the join for which the old status value is greater than the new one
would correspond to a supplier whose status had decreased.)
      Now, constraint TRC1 is a transition constraint that applies to just a single relvar: namely, the
suppliers relvar S. Here by contrast is an example of a transition constraint that applies to two
relvars taken in combination (“the total quantity of any given part, taken over all suppliers, can
never decrease”):
      CONSTRAINT TRC2 IS_EMPTY (
                 ( ( SUMMARIZE SP' PER ( S'{ S# } ) ADD ( SUM ( QTY ) AS SQ' ) )
                   JOIN
                   ( SUMMARIZE SP PER ( S { S# } ) ADD ( SUM ( QTY ) AS SQ ) ) )
                 WHERE SQ' > SQ ) ;

      Like the database constraints required by RM Prescription 23, transition constraints are
checked at statement boundaries. Note: The database constraints of RM Prescription 23 are
sometimes referred to as state constraints, because they refer to valid “states” of the database rather
than valid transitions from one such “state” to another.


RM VERY STRONG SUGGESTION 5: QUOTA QUERIES

D should provide some shorthand for expressing quota queries. It should not be necessary to
convert the relation concerned into (e.g.) an array in order to formulate such a query.

                                       ———  ———

A quota query is a query that specifies a desired limit, or quota, on the cardinality of the result: for
example, the query “Get the three heaviest parts,” for which the specified quota is three. (Note,
however, that the actual result cardinality might be either more or less than the specified quota, as
we will soon see.) Here is a possible Tutorial D formulation of this example:
       WITH ( P RENAME ( WEIGHT AS WT ) ) AS T1 ,
            ( EXTEND P ADD ( COUNT ( T1 WHERE WT > WEIGHT )
                        AS #_HEAVIER ) AS T2 ,
            ( T2 WHERE #_HEAVIER < 3 ) AS T3 :
       T3 { P#, PNAME, WEIGHT, COLOR, CITY }

Given our usual sample data, the result consists of parts P2, P3, and P6.
      Quota queries are quite common in practice. Now, such queries can be formulated in terms of
our usual relational operators, as we have just seen, but such formulations do tend to be rather
roundabout and cumbersome. It therefore seems worthwhile to consider the possibility of providing
some more user-friendly way of expressing them; hence RM Very Strong Suggestion 5. To be
specific, we propose introducing a new relational operator of the following form:
      <rank>
         ::= RANK <relation exp> BY ( <order item commalist> AS <attribute name> )




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          234
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                        Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


     The <relation exp> must not be a <monadic or dyadic other built-in relation op inv>. We
remind you of the syntax of <order item> (repeated from Chapter 5):
       <order item>
          ::=   <direction> <attribute ref>

       <direction>
          ::=   ASC | DESC

       Here is a more or less self-explanatory example of the use of RANK:
       RANK P BY ( DESC WEIGHT AS WEIGHT_RANK )

       Given our usual sample data, the result of this operation is as shown in Fig. 10.2 (we assume
that attribute WEIGHT_RANK in that result is of type INTEGER). The effect of the operation is
thus to “rank” part tuples in order of descending weight (of course, there is no implication that the
system must perform a physical sort in order to obtain the desired result). The original quota query
“Get the three heaviest parts” is now straightforward:
       ( r WHERE WEIGHT_RANK  3 ) { ALL BUT WEIGHT_RANK }

where r denotes the result of the RANK operation. Note: Given our usual sample data, this
expression does indeed yield a result relation of exactly three tuples. However, if (say) part P4 had
weight 18 instead of 14, it would yield four tuples, not three; and if there were currently only two
parts altogether instead of six, it would necessarily yield only two tuples. See reference [56] for
further analysis of such matters.
╔════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║     ┌────┬───────┬───────┬────────┬────────┬─────────────┐     ║
║     │ P# │ PNAME │ COLOR │ WEIGHT │ CITY   │ WEIGHT_RANK │     ║
║     ├════┼───────┼───────┼────────┼────────┼─────────────┤     ║
║     │ P1 │ Nut   │ Red   │     12 │ London │           5 │     ║
║     │ P2 │ Bolt │ Green │      17 │ Paris │            2 │     ║
║     │ P3 │ Screw │ Blue │      17 │ Rome   │           2 │     ║
║     │ P4 │ Screw │ Red   │     14 │ London │           4 │     ║
║     │ P5 │ Cam   │ Blue │      12 │ Paris │            5 │     ║
║     │ P6 │ Cog   │ Red   │     19 │ London │           1 │     ║
║     └────┴───────┴───────┴────────┴────────┴─────────────┘     ║
╚════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 10.2: RANK example (result)

       RANK is just shorthand, of course1—the example just shown is equivalent to the following:
       WITH ( P RENAME ( WEIGHT AS WT ) ) AS T1 :
       EXTEND P ADD ( COUNT ( T1 WHERE WT > WEIGHT ) + 1 AS WEIGHT_RANK )

       Here is another example:


1
  Despite the fact that we claimed the opposite in reference [83] (and therefore proposed a different solution to the
problem of quota queries in that reference, one that we now explicitly disavow).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             235
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations             Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


      S JOIN ( ( RANK S BY ( ASC STATUS AS SR ) ) WHERE SR  2 ) { STATUS }

(“Get all suppliers whose status is one of the two smallest”; given our usual sample data, the two
smallest status values are 10 and 20, and so the result consists of suppliers S1, S2, and S4). The
second operand to the join is an expression denoting a relation with one attribute, called STATUS,
that contains the two smallest status values. The join then yields a relation containing exactly those
suppliers having one of those two status values.
      The <rank> shorthand facilitates the formulation of many kinds of statistical queries. We
give just one more example here:
      ( ( RANK S BY ( DESC STATUS AS SR ) )
        WHERE SR  ( COUNT ( S ) / 10 ) ) { ALL BUT SR }

(“Get the top 10 percent of suppliers,” where by “the top 10 percent” we mean those suppliers
whose status is greater than that of the other 90 percent, loosely speaking).


RM VERY STRONG SUGGESTION 6: GENERALIZED TRANSITIVE CLOSURE

D should provide some shorthand for expressing the generalized transitive closure operation,
including the ability to specify generalized concatenate and aggregate operations.

                                      ———  ———

Tutorial D already includes support for the transitive closure operator TCLOSE; unfortunately,
however, TCLOSE by itself is not adequate for dealing with all possible recursive queries, as we
now explain.
       It is convenient to begin by repeating, and amplifying, some of the remarks on transitive
closure from the discussion of RM Prescription 19 in Chapter 6. Consider the bill-of-materials
relation MMQ shown in Fig. 10.3 (an extended version of Fig. 6.1 from Chapter 6). As explained
in Chapter 6, we can refer to that relation as a digraph relation, because it can be represented as a
directed graph of nodes and directed arcs; the nodes are named and possibly labeled (see later), the
arcs are directed and (again) possibly labeled. For example, in the particular case of the graph for
relation MMQ (refer to Fig. 10.4):

 ■    Each node is named for a particular part.

 ■    There is an arc from node Pi to node Pj if and only if part Pi contains part Pj as an immediate
      component.

 ■    Each arc is labeled with the corresponding quantity.

 ■    The nodes are unlabeled.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       236
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations            Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║          ┌──────────┬────┬──────────┬────┬─────┬─────┐          ║
║      MMQ │ MAJOR_P# : P# │ MINOR_P# : P# │ QTY : QTY │          ║
║          ├══════════╧════┼══════════╧════┼─────┴─────┤          ║
║          │ P1            │ P2            │         5 │          ║
║          │ P1            │ P3            │         3 │          ║
║          │ P2            │ P3            │         2 │          ║
║          │ P2            │ P4            │         7 │          ║
║          │ P3            │ P5            │         4 │          ║
║          │ P4            │ P6            │         8 │          ║
║          └───────────────┴───────────────┴───────────┘          ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 10.3: Relation MMQ


╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                                                                 ║
║                                part P1                          ║
║                                                                 ║
║                 5                                     3         ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║               part P2              2                            ║
║                                                                 ║
║                 7                                               ║
║                                                                 ║
║               part P4                          part P3          ║
║                                                                 ║
║                 8                                     4         ║
║                                                                 ║
║               part P6                          part P5          ║
║                                                                 ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 10.4: Graph of relation MMQ

      As noted in Chapter 6, it is often convenient to replace a directed graph such as that of Fig.
10.4 by a pure hierarchy with possibly repeated nodes, as in Fig. 10.5.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        237
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations           Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                                                                 ║
║                                part P1                          ║
║                                                                 ║
║                5                                      3         ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║               part P2                          part P3          ║
║                                                                 ║
║      2                        7                       4         ║
║                                                                 ║
║     part P3            part P4                                  ║
║                                                part P5          ║
║      4                        8                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║                                                                 ║
║     part P5            part P6                                  ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 10.5: Graph of relation MMQ as a hierarchy

      Now, in Chapter 6 we explained how TCLOSE could be applied to what was effectively the
projection of relation MMQ over MAJOR_P# and MINOR_P#; Fig. 10.6 (a repeat of Fig. 6.4)
shows the result. And we claimed that TCLOSE was important in connection with the part
explosion problem—i.e., the problem of finding all components, at all levels, of some specified part.
For example, consider the problem of “exploding” part P2. Here is a Tutorial D formulation of this
query:
      ( ( TCLOSE ( MM { MAJOR_P#, MINOR_P# } ) )
        WHERE MAJOR_P# = P#('P2') ) { MINOR_P# }

╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                ┌──────────┬────┬──────────┬────┐                ║
║                │ MAJOR_P# : P# │ MINOR_P# : P# │                ║
║                ├══════════╧════┼══════════╧════┤                ║
║                │ P1            │ P2            │                ║
║                │ P1            │ P3            │                ║
║                │ P2            │ P3            │                ║
║                │ P2            │ P4            │                ║
║                │ P3            │ P5            │                ║
║                │ P4            │ P6            │                ║
║                │ P1            │ P4            │                ║
║                │ P1            │ P5            │                ║
║                │ P1            │ P6            │                ║
║                │ P2            │ P5            │                ║
║                │ P2            │ P6            │                ║
║                └───────────────┴───────────────┘                ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 10.6: Transitive closure of MMQ { MAJOR_P#, MINOR_P# }

      The trouble is, what we really need is something rather more general than just TCLOSE per
se. Consider the query “What is the total quantity of part P5 that is needed to make part P1?”
Inspection of either Fig. 10.4 or Fig. 10.5 will quickly show that the answer is 52:

 ■    For each path from node P1 to node P5, we multiply the quantities that are the arc labels along
      that path.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      238
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations            Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


 ■    Then we add together all the products so obtained.

Refer to Fig. 10.7.
╔══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                                                                              ║
║    ( 5 * 2 * 4 ) + ( 3 * 4 )        52                                       ║
║                                                                              ║
║                                                                              ║
║                                                                              ║
║     concatenate (*)                           aggregate (+)                  ║
║     along paths                               across paths                   ║
║                                                                              ║
╚══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 10.7: Total quantity of part P5 in part P1

       In practice, it turns out that what is often wanted is not just a simple part explosion as such
but, rather, a gross requirement—which is, loosely speaking, a combination of the “part explosion”
and “total quantity” queries. In other words, we want a listing of all the parts that go to make up a
given part, together with the corresponding total quantities. Following reference [93], therefore, we
suggest a generalized version of the transitive closure operation that is intended to address problems
of this general nature. The operator takes four operands:

 1.     A relation of nodes and node labels (see below)

 2.     A relation of directed arcs and arc labels

 3.     A concatenate operator

 4.     An aggregate operator

      In our example, operand 1 is the parts relation (not explicitly mentioned in the foregoing
discussion); operand 2 is relation MMQ; operand 3 is “*”; and operand 4 is “+”. The operation
returns a ternary relation with heading
      { X T, Y T, Z C }

where X and Y are “node” attributes and are as in operand 2 (note that they both have the same type
T), Z represents the computed value obtained by following all paths from node X to node Y and
applying the concatenate and aggregate operators appropriately, and C is the type of that computed
value. The body of the result contains a tuple for every path, direct or indirect, in the operand 2
graph.
       Note: As it happens, there are no node labels in the bill-of-materials example, but such is not
always the case. For example, consider an airline schedule. Here the nodes denote cities, the node
labels are minimum connection times, the arcs denote flights, and the arc labels are departure and
arrival times. Note moreover that the bill-of-materials graph is acyclic, but the airline schedule
graph is not. If there can be cycles in the graph, the concatenate operator must be defined to take




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        239
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                    Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


care of them somehow; for example, in the airline schedule example, it must reject routes that visit
the same city twice.


RM VERY STRONG SUGGESTION 7: USER-DEFINED GENERIC OPERATORS

D should provide some means for users to define their own generic operators, including in
particular generic relational operators.

                                           ———  ———

For simplicity, the discussion that follows concentrates on relational operators specifically. The
points are all applicable to other generic operators as well, of course, mutatis mutandis.
       Recall from earlier chapters that the built-in relational operators are all generic, in the sense
that they work for all relations (loosely speaking). The operator JOIN, for example, applies to any
pair of relations whatsoever; there is no question of the relations in question having to conform to
certain specific relation types (except of course that attributes with the same name must be of the
same type). Moreover, those operators are generic precisely because they are associated with a type
generator—namely, RELATION—instead of with some specific relation type; they therefore apply
to every specific relation type that is defined by means of that type generator.1
       RM Very Strong Suggestion 7 suggests that it would be advantageous for users to be able to
define generic operators of their own. By way of example, suppose Tutorial D did not include
direct support for the Great Divide. Then, if the suggestion under discussion were implemented, it
would be possible for users to define a generic Great Divide operator of their own. User-defined
aggregate operators provide another example (the built-in aggregate operators—SUM, MAX, and
so on—are also generic in the foregoing sense); for instance, it might be possible to define a
MEDIAN operator in this way.
       We have no concrete suggestions to offer regarding user-defined generic operators at this
time, because we believe the issue requires further study.
       Note: The foregoing discussion raises another possibility—namely, that it would be nice if
users could also define their own type generators. We do not go so far as to make this possibility a
concrete part of RM Very Strong Suggestion 7, however, since we believe it requires further study
(over and above the further study already mentioned in the previous paragraph).




1
  As mentioned in passing in Chapter 6, generic operators thus constitute another kind of polymorphism (we considered
overloading polymorphism in Chapter 6, and we will be discussing inclusion polymorphism at length in Chapter 14).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     240
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations            Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


RM VERY STRONG SUGGESTION 8: SQL MIGRATION

SQL should be implementable in D—not because such implementation is desirable in itself, but so
that a painless migration route might be available for current SQL users. To this same end, existing
SQL databases should be convertible to a form that D programs can operate on without error.

                                      ———  ———

We reject SQL as a long-term foundation for the future. However, we are not so naïve as to think
that SQL will ever disappear; rather, it is our hope that some D will be sufficiently superior to SQL
that it will become the database language of choice, by a process of natural selection, and SQL will
become “the database language of last resort.” In fact, we see a parallel with the world of
programming languages, where COBOL has never disappeared (and never will); but COBOL has
become “the programming language of last resort” for developing applications, because preferable
alternatives exist. We see SQL as a kind of database COBOL, and we would like some D to
become a preferable alternative to it.
       To repeat something we said in Chapter 1, however, we do realize that SQL databases and
applications are going to be with us for a long time—to think otherwise would be quite
unrealistic—and so we do have to pay some attention to the question of what to do about today’s
SQL legacy. Hence the present “very strong suggestion.”
       Please note immediately that the suggestion in question does not mean that D needs to be a
proper superset of SQL. Rather, it means that it should be possible to write a “front end”—i.e., a
layer of D code on top of the true relational functionality of D—that (a) will accept SQL operations
against converted SQL data and (b) will give the results that those SQL operations would have
given if they had been executed against the original unconverted SQL data. We believe it should be
possible to construct such a front end without contravening any of the prescriptions and
proscriptions laid down in the Manifesto. (An analogous remark applies to the recommendation that
SQL databases be convertible to D form, of course.) In fact—noting that D is computationally
complete, and noting too that SQL front ends already exist for many nonSQL systems—we see no
reason to doubt the feasibility of producing a front end such as the one under consideration.
       Of course, we would not want a D database, even one that is really just a converted SQL
database, to be accessible only via SQL; rather, we would like it to be available for use in native D
mode as well. To that end, it is important for anyone involved in the development of such a front
end to bear the following goals in mind:

 ■    First of all (to repeat), users must be able to make direct use of D for ad hoc queries and for
      developing new applications on the D version of the database.

 ■    That D database should not be encumbered with material placed there solely to support the
      SQL front end. Such material, having no obvious bearing on the enterprise the database is
      intended to serve, might cause undue confusion for D users.

 ■    SQL users should not be deprived of the benefits of the D optimizer. Such deprivation would
      arise, for example, if the SQL front end used D as a mere access method, instead of mapping
      high-level SQL expressions into equally high-level D expressions.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         241
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                      Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


      We should add that it will almost certainly not be possible to achieve these goals 100 percent,
though we do think they should be strongly striven for. The fact is, there are certain features in
SQL that (as far as we can see) could only be fully supported in an SQL front end if D in turn
contained analogous features of its own—and the features in question are either ones we explicitly
proscribe or ones that would constitute blatant violations of D’s conceptual integrity (and such
violations are implicitly proscribed by RM Prescription 26). We hope and believe that the SQL
features in question are so pathological that uses of them will be few and far between, sufficiently
so for it to be acceptable for such uses to be worked around on a case-by-case basis.1 Examples that
come to mind are:

    ■   View updating where the effects prescribed by SQL are logically incorrect (in particular, view
        updating when WITH CASCADED CHECK OPTION is not specified)

    ■   The SQL statement SET CONSTRAINTS (all constraints are “immediate” in D, and there is
        no notion of dynamically switching them on and off)

    ■   SQL expressions that select the same column twice without performing any kind of column
        renaming (e.g., the SQL expression SELECT A, A FROM T)

and so on
      To return to the main thread of the discussion: We now proceed to offer a few practical
suggestions for implementing the desired SQL front end. Of course, it goes without saying that our
suggestions are nowhere near being a complete design—they are only “notes toward” such a
design—but they do address certain questions that come to mind almost immediately when our RM
Proscriptions in particular are considered in such a context.
      First of all, we assume that the process of converting an SQL database to a D analog is
reasonably “direct,” in the sense that (a) every SQL base table maps to a D real relvar, and (b) every
column in such a base table maps to an attribute in the corresponding relvar. Under that
assumption, of course, we are immediately confronted with the possibility that the base table in
question might contain duplicate rows or nulls or both. Direct support for these features is
expressly prohibited in D by RM Proscriptions 3 and 4, so what is to be done? This question is the
topic of the two subsections immediately following.

Duplicate Rows

An SQL base table permits duplicate rows if and only if no key is declared for it via either
PRIMARY KEY or UNIQUE. Given such a base table T, then, the D relvar R corresponding to T
will have to have an extra attribute (i.e., one not corresponding to any column in T) to provide the
necessary key functionality. That attribute can be declared with default SERIAL ()—meaning it
constitutes a “system key”—if D supports RM Very Strong Suggestion 1 as discussed earlier in this
chapter. The SQL front end can now support certain SQL INSERT operations by mapping them
directly into D INSERTs; since values for the extra attribute are provided by the system, no

1
  In fact, we are somewhat skeptical as to whether the features in question are supported in existing SQL front ends
either (or even in SQL DBMSs, in some cases).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                            242
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations              Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


corresponding attribute is needed in the relation to be inserted, and of course there is no
corresponding column in the SQL table to be inserted into.
        Unfortunately, if T permits duplicate rows, it follows that any table t to be inserted into T
might contain duplicate rows as well. Let r be the D relation corresponding to t. Like R, therefore,
r will need an extra attribute (i.e., one over and above those corresponding to the columns of t). Our
suggested TAG relational operator can be used to provide that extra attribute; if we are not careful,
however, we could now be faced with a situation in which each of r and R has an attribute that has
no counterpart in the other. And even if we are careful to ensure the extra attributes do correspond
(i.e., they have the same name—X, say—and the same type in both r and R), there is still the
problem that, in general, the X values provided for r by TAG will clash with the X values already
present in R. Note: We are assuming here that TAG generates X values that start again from one
every time it is invoked; the clash occurs because {X} is supposed to be a key for R. One solution
to this problem is to extend TAG to allow the user to specify a different starting value on different
invocations, a possibility mentioned under RM Very Strong Suggestion 1.
        We also need to address the problem of naming the systematically generated attributes that
have no corresponding SQL columns. Happily, SQL expressly prohibits column names that begin
with an underscore; assuming D has no such prohibition, therefore, we have here the basis of an
obvious way to avoid naming clashes. What is more, the same approach could also simplify the
task of the SQL front end in hiding the extra attributes from its users.
        Next, we need to consider the question of duplicate rows that are dynamically generated—i.e.,
the question of those SQL operators that can generate duplicate rows at run time. The operators in
question are (a) SELECT without DISTINCT, (b) VALUES, and (c) UNION ALL:

 ■      SELECT without DISTINCT and VALUES can both be implemented by using our suggested
        TAG operator and having the front end discard attributes generated by TAG on presentation
        of final results.

 ■      The same treatment is not suitable for UNION ALL, but here an easy solution lies in merely
        adding a constant attribute to the D relations corresponding to the SQL tables that are the
        operands of the UNION ALL. For example, the SQL expression
        SELECT * FROM T1 UNION CORRESPONDING ALL SELECT * FROM T2

        can be mapped to the Tutorial D expression
        ( EXTEND T1 ADD ( 1 AS _EXTRA ) ) UNION ( EXTEND T2 ADD ( 2 AS _EXTRA ) )

        Again, of course, the front end would have to discard the extra attribute on presentation of the
        final result.

Nulls

Nulls in SQL are hard to explain. There are many reasons for this state of affairs, but one important
one is that, despite the fact that in SQL circles they are often explicitly called null values, SQL nulls
are not really values at all but “marks” [23]. However (and regardless of whether or not you agree
with this position), the fact is that nulls will have to map to values in D, because in D every




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          243
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations            Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


expression—be it an operator invocation, a simple literal, an attribute reference, a parameter
reference, a variable reference, or whatever—always denotes a value specifically. With this point in
mind, therefore, we offer the following observations:

 ■    The built-in SQL type INTEGER is not the same as the built-in type of that name typically
      found in conventional programming languages (and a similar observation applies to all of the
      other built-in types in SQL). The reason is that, as the SQL standard puts it, “[every] data
      type includes a special value, called the null value” [99].

 ■    The Manifesto prescribes support for the built-in type boolean. The SQL standard does
      support a type it calls BOOLEAN, but that type is not the same as the prescribed type for at
      least the reasons explained in Appendix H, q.v. In any case, most SQL implementations do
      not explicitly support type BOOLEAN (though they do support expressions—e.g., in
      WHERE clauses—that return truth values, as the SQL standard requires).

 ■    The SQL equality comparison operator is not the same as that found in conventional
      languages. In particular, it is not the same as the equality comparison operator required in D.

 ■    The other scalar operators of SQL, where they have apparent counterparts in conventional
      languages, are not the same as those apparent counterparts. For example, the SQL operators
      “+” and “||” (concatenate) are not the usual “+” and “||” operators. Indeed, the types of the
      operands of those operators are not the usual types, as already noted above.

      These four points, we suggest, crystallize the problems (or, at least, the major problems)
arising from nulls that confront the implementer of an SQL front end. Now we make some
observations regarding D that might point to ways of addressing those problems:

 ■    As noted in the introduction to this part of the book, the Manifesto is intended to be open
      ended; i.e., anything not explicitly prescribed is permitted, unless of course it leads to a
      violation of something explicitly prescribed or proscribed. In particular, therefore, there are
      no proscribed types, and there are no proscribed operators (generally speaking). Nor do we
      have any prescriptions or proscriptions concerning concrete syntax, modulo RM Prescription
      26.

 ■    As a consequence of the foregoing point, D is at least theoretically permitted to have (e.g.) an
      operator called “+” that is not the normal operator of that name. A similar remark applies to
      “=”. That said, however, we venture to suggest that to use such names for SQL-like
      perversions of the operators they normally stand for would be counter to the spirit of D. A
      similar remark applies to the names of built-in types such as INTEGER and BOOLEAN (as
      well as all of the other familiar ones—CHAR, DATE, TIME, and so on).

 ■    But if D had a built-in type called INTEGER that was the same as the type of that name found
      in conventional languages, it could certainly also have another type (built in or otherwise),
      perhaps called SQL_INTEGER, with properties analogous to those of the SQL type called
      INTEGER. A similar remark applies to other built-in types.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        244
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations            Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


 ■    Likewise, if D had “=” as its operator for equality comparison, it could also have another
      operator (perhaps “sql=”) for the corresponding but different SQL operator. A similar remark
      applies to other SQL scalar operators.

       In other words, we would expect D to have first claim on the usual names for the most
familiar types and operators, but to provide counterparts (or allow the user to define counterparts) to
all of the corresponding but different SQL types and operators, with names that are different from
those of SQL for those counterparts.
       Now suppose SQL base table T has a column I of (SQL) type INTEGER. Suppose too that
when base table T is mapped to D relvar T, column I becomes attribute I, of type SQL_INTEGER.
We now point out certain consequences of the foregoing observations (using Tutorial D syntax
specifically, as and where appropriate):

 ■    The SQL expression
      SELECT * FROM T WHERE I < 10

      maps to the Tutorial D expression
      T WHERE ( I sql< 10 ) = SQL_BOOLEAN ( 'TRUE' )

      We explain this mapping as follows. First of all, the SQL “<” operator maps to a Tutorial D
      analog of that operator (“sql<”). Since this latter operator does not yield values of the
      Tutorial D type BOOLEAN, we must operate on its result with some operator that does—
      namely, the Tutorial D equality comparison operator (“=”). Let the Tutorial D type
      corresponding to operators such as sql< (and, in particular, sql=) be SQL_BOOLEAN, with
      values SQL_BOOLEAN ('TRUE'), SQL_BOOLEAN ('FALSE'), and SQL_BOOLEAN
      ('UNKNOWN'). In the example, then, the right comparand in the WHERE clause is specified
      as an invocation of the selector corresponding to that type. In general, in fact, the SQL
      WHERE clause “WHERE cond” will map to the D WHERE clause “WHERE (SQL_cond) =
      SQL_BOOLEAN ('TRUE')” (where SQL_cond is the mapped version of cond, of course).

 ■    The SQL expression
      SELECT DISTINCT I, J, ..., K FROM T

      can be mapped more directly into just
      T { I, J, ..., K }

      This straightforward mapping is possible because SQL reverts to the normal treatment of
      equality in places where its usual treatment is impossible to apply in any sensible or
      meaningful way.

 ■    The SQL front end will certainly require SQL_INTEGER to be an ordinal type, because the
      INTEGER type of SQL is such a type. Thus, the Tutorial D expression




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        245
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations            Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


      T WHERE I < SQL_INTEGER ('20')

      might be valid. Whether the result of that expression includes those tuples of T for which the
      I value is SQL_INTEGER ('NULL') will depend, of course, on how the operator “<“ is
      defined for type SQL_INTEGER.

 ■    The result of the Tutorial D expression
      T WHERE I ≠ SQL_INTEGER ('20')

      certainly does include those tuples of T for which the I value is SQL_INTEGER ('NULL'),
      unlike its SQL counterpart:
      SELECT * FROM T WHERE I <> 20

      (The symbol “<>” here is SQL syntax for “≠”.) We venture to suggest that—at least in some
      cases—D expressions involving tables derived from SQL databases with nulls will give
      results that are more intuitively acceptable than those of SQL expressions.

       The foregoing proposals, it has to be said, might make it difficult to meet our goal of making
the converted SQL database usable “in native D mode.” At the same time, we are aware that some
SQL database administrators today already implement a null-free policy (at least insofar as it is in
fact possible to steer clear of nulls in SQL), and it would be a shame for users of such databases to
have to put up with any inconvenience arising from a migration strategy that takes nulls into
account. For databases that have been implemented under a null-free policy, therefore, we believe
it should be possible to map the built-in types and operators of SQL directly to their obvious
counterparts in D and deal manually with any SQL expressions that make use of operators that
generate nulls dynamically (e.g., outer joins and aggregations over empty sets).
       We now turn to certain other SQL features and idiosyncrasies that will require special
attention in the SQL front end. Note: Most of the subsections that follow have to do with features
introduced into SQL with SQL:1999, and tutorial descriptions of those features can be found in
references [41] and [116-117]. There do not seem to be any tutorials available on SQL:2003 at the
time of writing.

SQL Column Names vs. D Attribute Names

The following SQL peculiarities will need to be addressed:

 ■    There is more than one way of referring to a column in SQL expressions. For example, the
      SQL expression
      SELECT T1.C FROM T AS T1

      is equivalent to the SQL expression
      SELECT C FROM T AS T1




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       246
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations           Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


     As a consequence, the result of the first expression yields a table whose sole column is named
     C and not T1.C. Hence, the following expression (for example) is not valid in SQL:
     SELECT T2.T1.C FROM ( SELECT T1.C FROM T AS T1 ) AS T2

     It follows that if D adopts the simple approach to attribute naming and referencing used in
     Tutorial D (an approach we would certainly recommend for consideration by other D
     designers), then the mapping of SQL FROM clauses will be nontrivial. However, the
     Tutorial D support for systematic renaming of all attributes could be useful in this
     connection. For example, the SQL FROM clause
     FROM T1, T2

     could be mapped to
     ( T1 RENAME ( PREFIX '' AS 'T1_' ) )
     JOIN
     ( T2 RENAME ( PREFIX '' AS 'T2_' ) )

     This mapping would avoid the problem that arises when T1 and T2 have columns of the same
     name. Of course, there would be obvious implications for mapping other parts of the overall
     SQL expression that contained the FROM clause in question.

 ■   The SQL expression
     SELECT A + B FROM T

     yields a table with an “anonymous” column. The SQL standard actually requires such
     columns to acquire unpredictable column names, so the SQL front end to D could perhaps
     simply follow the standard’s prescription in this respect (but taking the extra precaution of
     ensuring that no two columns in the same table have the same name). Our previous
     suggestion concerning attribute names beginning with underscores could be of help here.

 ■   The SQL expression
     SELECT * FROM T1 UNION SELECT * FROM T2

     cannot in general be mapped to
     T1 UNION T2

     (why not?). Thus, it might be necessary to rename attributes so that corresponding attributes
     in the operands of the union have the same name. Unfortunately, this fact implies that the
     SQL-to-D database conversion process will have to keep some record of SQL left-to-right
     column order, because there will (of course) be no analogous attribute ordering in D. (In fact,
     such a record will be needed for several other reasons anyway—e.g., supporting SELECT * or
     INSERT when no column names are specified.)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          247
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations            Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


Character String Comparisons

As noted in Chapter 6 (under RM Prescription 8), it is possible in SQL for the character strings
      'AB'

and
      'AB '

to be treated as equal; to be specific, they are treated as equal if and only if PAD SPACE applies to
the applicable “collation” [41]. In effect, PAD SPACE means that trailing space characters are
implicitly trimmed before the comparison is done. That implicit trimming will have to be made
explicit in D.

Cursors

Cursor operations can be implemented as follows:

 ■    OPEN causes the relation to be iterated over to be copied into an array (probably with some
      appropriate locking), as in the <relation get> operation of Tutorial D (see Chapter 5).

 ■    If “the cursor is updatable” [41], then each row in that array will have to include, either
      explicitly or implicitly, some key value for the corresponding row from the underlying real
      relvar.

 ■    FETCH is straightforward.

 ■    DELETE or UPDATE WHERE CURRENT—in some respects the most questionable of all
      SQL operators—can be simulated by means of a D DELETE or UPDATE WHERE on the
      underlying table, using the appropriate key value (which will have to be retrieved in response
      to the corresponding FETCH, regardless of whether the key columns are “columns of the
      cursor”). If the cursor is a scroll cursor, however, there are some tricky decisions to be made:

      ●   DELETE: Suppose the cursor is positioned on the third row of a four-row result (i.e., that
          row is the DELETE target). In some implementations the DELETE closes the gap, so
          that FETCH ABSOLUTE 4 will now fail and FETCH ABSOLUTE 3 will fetch the
          original fourth row; in others, the DELETE just marks the row as deleted and does not
          close the gap, so that FETCH ABSOLUTE 3 will now fail and FETCH ABSOLUTE 4
          will succeed. The standard allows either behavior.

      ●   UPDATE: Here the standard specifies that the current row of the cursor is to be updated
          as well as the corresponding base table row. However, it appears to overlook the fact that
          elsewhere it states that the UPDATE target column names refer to columns of the
          underlying base table, not columns of the cursor! For example, let table T have columns
          X, Y, and Z, and let cursor CR1 be defined on SELECT X AS Y FROM T. Then the
          effect of, e.g., UPDATE T SET X = 1, Y = 2, Z = 3 WHERE CURRENT OF CR1 is




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        248
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations           Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


          unclear. Presumably at most one of the three assignments can affect the sole column of
          the cursor, and presumably the assignment to Z cannot be the one in question. It would
          seem logical for the cursor column to be assigned 1, to keep it as a copy of T.X, but the
          standard does not actually say as much. The front end might like to take guidance from
          whichever SQL implementation it would most like to emulate.

ARRAY Types

The Third Manifesto does not prohibit D from including support for “collection” type generators, so
D could legitimately support an ARRAY type generator, and we would certainly expect such
support to include everything needed in connection with SQL’s array types. (Of course, if such an
ARRAY type generator were indeed supported, it would presumably replace or subsume the limited
array support described in Chapter 5. Note, however, that it would still be the case that array
variables would not be allowed in the database, thanks to The Information Principle. See RM
Prescription 16.)

MULTISET Types

D could support a MULTISET type generator as a direct counterpart to SQL:2003’s new
MULTISET type constructor (though with the proviso that multiset variables would not be allowed
in the database).

ROW Types

Everything needed in connection with SQL’s row types can easily be simulated in D by means of
the tuple type support required by RM Prescriptions 6 and 9.

XML Data

D could support an XML type as a direct counterpart to SQL:2003’s type of that name (see
reference [76] for a tutorial discussion of that new type). D’s support would necessarily include
support for equality comparison (and all of the SQL constructs that depend on it, such as SELECT
DISTINCT, NATURAL JOIN, FOREIGN KEY, and so on), over and above the XML facilities
defined in the SQL standard.

User-Defined Types

SQL divides user-defined types into two kinds, “structured types” and “DISTINCT types.”
However, the difference between the two appears to be artificial and without good justification; we
would not expect D to embrace it, therefore, even if it does not directly contravene any of our
prescriptions or proscriptions. (The terminology is bad, too, inasmuch as all user-defined types,
even the so-called structured ones, are still best thought of as scalar types in our terms.)

Representations: The most immediately obvious difference between structured and DISTINCT
types is in the way their representations are specified. For a structured type, the representation is
specified as a commalist of components called attributes (each consisting of an attribute-name/type-




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      249
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations           Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


name pair); for a DISTINCT type, the representation is specified as a single type name, and
furthermore the specified type must be built in (e.g., INTEGER, REAL, BLOB). Both of these
styles of specification are easily mappable to a D possrep, with just a single component in the case
of a DISTINCT type.
      Unfortunately, however, there is no notion in SQL of each “possrep” automatically having an
associated selector operator (see below), and so there cannot be any notion of every value of the
type in question being produced by some invocation of such a selector. This fact could give rise to
some difficulty in connection with inheritance (see Part IV of this book). For example, suppose
type POINT has the usual cartesian coordinates representation, with components X and Y. Then
SQL will allow us to define a subtype of POINT—COLORED_POINT, say—whose values cannot
be represented by X and Y components! (By X and Y components alone, that is. The
representation for colored points would presumably involve three components—X, Y, and
COLOR.) By contrast, a D version of this example might involve three types, not two: a dummy
type corresponding to both uncolored and colored points, and two subtypes of that dummy type,
POINT and COLORED_POINT, corresponding to uncolored and colored points, respectively. (See
Chapter 14 for an explanation of dummy types, and Appendix G for an extended discussion of
examples of this same general nature.)

Operators implied by representations: RM Prescriptions 4 and 5 require each declared possrep
to cause automatic provision of a corresponding selector operator and certain operators for exposing
the possrep in question (THE_ operators, in Tutorial D). We have already observed that SQL has
no counterpart to our selector; however, it does require each declared representation to cause
automatic provision of certain observer and mutator methods. The “observer” methods correspond
exactly to the read-only operators required by RM Prescription 5. The “mutator” methods do not
correspond exactly to the update operators required by RM Prescription 5, however, because they
are not update operators!—they do not operate on a variable specifically, and they do return a value.
In fact, an SQL mutator method invocation is logically equivalent to a certain selector invocation
(and hence can easily be implemented in the proposed front end). See Appendix H for further
explanation.

Lack of selector operators: The fact that SQL does not automatically provide selectors makes it
likely that SQL type implementations will explicitly include user-defined analogs of those
operators. But those analogs will be redundant with D’s selectors and might well conflict in name
with them.

Constructor functions: Let T be an SQL structured type; then T has an associated niladic
constructor function that, when invoked, returns that value of type T whose every attribute has the
default value defined for that attribute. While we would not expect D to provide direct analogs of
such constructors, it should be clear that the SQL front end can easily do so.
      We remark that certain other automatically provided SQL operators might also have no direct
analogs in D, in which case they can be handled in like manner. Alternatively, D might include
certain operators for the specific purpose of aiding SQL migration in this regard, operators that are
not prescribed, nor even suggested, in the Manifesto as such. However, implementers considering
such operators should watch out for possible violations of conceptual integrity; in particular, they




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      250
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations             Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


should make sure that any advantage for migrators from SQL is not outweighed by disadvantages
conferred on direct users of D.

Methods: SQL’s “methods” are SQL functions (i.e., read-only operators) of a certain special kind.
In particular, they are bundled with certain types—that is, the definition of any given method is
actually part of the definition of some user-defined type—and they therefore contravene OO Very
Strong Suggestion 2. But that bundling can surely be confined to the SQL front end (i.e., it need not
be supported in D itself). Similarly, SQL’s special method invocation syntax can be mapped to D’s
own read-only operator invocation syntax.
      A possible problem arises here in connection with inheritance, however. The problem is that,
in our inheritance model (again, see Part IV of this book), we suggest that the process of “run-time
binding” be done on the basis of the types of all arguments; however, the analogous process for
SQL’s methods is done on the basis of the type of the argument corresponding to what SQL calls
the “subject parameter” only. Care might thus be needed to ensure that an SQL method invocation,
when mapped to some D read-only operator invocation, really does have exactly the desired effect.

NOT INSTANTIABLE types: The SQL concept of a NOT INSTANTIABLE type makes sense
only if the type in question has subtypes. It maps directly to our “union type” concept (once again,
see Part IV).

FINAL types: SQL allows a type to be specified as FINAL, prohibiting the subsequent definition
of subtypes of that type. Support for FINAL could be provided directly in D if desired—in
particular, if desired for SQL migration purposes—without contravening any aspect of the
Manifesto. Without such support, FINAL types might constitute a small migration problem, but not
one we believe to be particularly significant.

Further remarks on type inheritance: Overall, SQL’s provisions for inheritance fall a long way
short of conforming to our own inheritance model (see Appendix H for more details). So far as we
are aware, however, all of the deviations are errors of omission, not commission (major examples
include SQL’s notable lack of support for type constraints and consequent lack of support for
specialization by constraint, also its lack of proper support for multiple inheritance). Such errors
thus present no problem insofar as mapping to D is concerned, with one major exception—the lack
of support for selectors (and we have already discussed some of the consequences of this particular
failure earlier in this section).

SQL Routines

SQL’s user-defined procedures and functions (excluding methods) should be readily convertible to
D update and read-only operators, respectively. User-defined methods will probably require some
kind of special treatment as already discussed. Note that D would not contravene any of our
prescriptions or proscriptions if it included special constructs to assist with support for SQL’s “user-
defined casts and transforms” [99].




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         251
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations                       Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


REF Types

A strong case can be made that SQL’s REF (“reference”) types violate OO Proscription 2. Even if
you do not agree with this position, it is certainly true that a “D” that included any such support
would be in violation of RM Prescription 26, with respect to conceptual integrity in particular.
Thus, D will in fact not include any such support. Assuming D does support system keys, however,
along the lines described under RM Very Strong Suggestion 1 earlier in this chapter, all SQL
operators on REF values are certainly implementable, because the operators in question are all
defined as shorthands for SQL expressions whose implementation in the SQL front end we have
already discussed.

Typed Tables

For the purposes of this subsection and the next, we take the term typed table to mean an SQL base
table or view whose definition is specified in part by reference to some structured type. Column
names and types for a typed table “of (structured) type T” are taken from the attribute definitions
that constitute the specified representation of T. Clearly, this particular aspect of typed tables could
be supported in the SQL front end without requiring any analogous support in D itself. (Indeed, we
would not expect any analogous support in D itself, since such support would come dangerously
close to contravening OO Proscription 1.)
      In addition to the columns implied by the definition of its associated type T, an SQL typed
table has a column of type REF(T), the REF type implied by the existence of T. Such a column is
called a “self-referencing column” and is required to have the uniqueness property. Moreover, it is
possible for the values of such a column to be system generated. We see no great difficulty for the
SQL front end here (see the remarks in the previous subsection regarding RM Very Strong
Suggestion 1).

Subtables and Supertables

If “typed tables” TT1 and TT2 are “of” types T1 and T2, respectively, and if T2 is a subtype of T1,1
then SQL allows table TT2 to be specified as a subtable of supertable TT1. For reasons explained at
length in Appendix G, this notion is one we find especially suspect, and direct support for it in D is
clearly out of the question. Indeed, we show in that same appendix how the problems that subtables
and supertables are supposed to solve can easily be solved by conventional relational mechanisms,
without the need for any new concepts at all. Those mechanisms should thus provide a basis for
workarounds (probably manual ones) that might be needed in the case of applications that “take
advantage of” this very dubious SQL feature.

Triggered Procedures

As noted in Chapter 1, The Third Manifesto is deliberately silent on the subject of triggered
procedures. SQL’s CREATE TRIGGER could perhaps be supported by some direct counterpart in

1
  We stress the fact that the statement “T2 is a subtype of T1” here is to be interpreted in accordance with the SQL
specifications, not in accordance with our own inheritance model.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                            252
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations            Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


D without violating any of our prescriptions or proscriptions, unless it led to violations of The
Assignment Principle (note in particular in this connection that SQL’s BEFORE triggers are
explicitly permitted to override source values).

CUBE, ROLLUP, etc.

The extensions to GROUP BY that came into the standard with SQL:1999, such as CUBE and
ROLLUP, are all specified as shorthands for certain SQL:1992 expressions. They should therefore
present no great problem for our SQL front end—despite the fact that provision of direct
counterparts in D would represent a violation of conceptual integrity (because the operators in
question effectively involve unions of relations of different types).

WINDOW Clauses

SQL:2003’s new WINDOW clauses do not violate any of our prescriptions or proscriptions, so
direct counterparts could be provided in D.

Identity and System-Generated Columns

SQL:2003’s new “identity column” and “system-generated column” features do not violate any of
our prescriptions or proscriptions, so direct counterparts could be provided in D. (In the case of
identity columns, that direct counterpart would effectively constitute an adoption of RM Very
Strong Suggestion 1.)

Sequence Generators

SQL:2003’s new sequence generators violate RM Prescription 16, for they are SQL database
objects that are not even tables, let alone relvars. However, front-end support for sequence
generators should be a simple matter if RM Very Strong Suggestion 1 is adopted to support identity
columns. In SQL, identity columns are defined in terms of sequence generators. In an SQL front
end to D, it could be the other way around; for example, NEXT VALUE FOR ... could be
implemented by inserting a tuple into a relvar with a system-generated key and returning the
cardinality of that relvar after the insert.


EXERCISES

10.1   Consider any SQL product that might be available to you. Does that product support
       anything resembling the features discussed under RM Very Strong Suggestion 1?

10.2   What is a superkey?

10.3   Consider the referential actions (cascade delete, etc.) mentioned briefly under RM Very
       Strong Suggestion 2. Do such actions violate The Assignment Principle? Justify your
       answer.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         253
Part III / Informal Discussions and Explanations              Chapter 10 / RM Very Strong Suggestions


10.4   It has been suggested that CASCADE might be supported as an option on DELETE and
       UPDATE instead of including it in a declarative foreign key specification; for example,
       DELETE S WHERE S# = S#('S1') CASCADE would delete the S tuple for supplier S1 and
       all of the SP tuples that referred to it. Evaluate this suggestion.

10.5   We said under RM Very Strong Suggestion 2 that there were good usability and productivity
       arguments in favor of supporting referential actions. What are those arguments?

10.6   The relational model as originally defined required a foreign key to reference not just some
       candidate key but, rather, a primary key specifically. What are the advantages of such a
       requirement? What are the disadvantages?

10.7   Design an extension to the FOREIGN KEY syntax suggested in this chapter that would
       allow us to specify that every tuple of a specified relvar R has a value for a specified set of
       attributes that appears as a value of a specified key in (a) exactly one, (b) at least one, (c) all,
       of some specified set of relvars R1, R2, ..., Rn (n > 0).

10.8   With reference to the usual suppliers-and-parts database, write an expression using RANK
       to get all parts whose weight is exactly the third smallest.

10.9   Using the syntax sketched under RM Very Strong Suggestion 4, write transition constraints
       for the following “business rules” on the suppliers-and-parts database:

       a.   Suppliers in Athens can move only to London or Paris, and suppliers in London can
            move only to Paris.

       b.   The total shipment quantity for a given part cannot be reduced in a single update to less
            than half its current value.

       (What do you think the qualification “in a single update” means here? Why is it important?
       Is it important?)

10.10 Define a Tutorial D operator for the “gross requirement” problem (see RM Very Strong
      Suggestion 6).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            254