                                            Chapter 11

                       OO Very Strong Suggestions

OO VERY STRONG SUGGESTION 1: TYPE INHERITANCE

Some level of type inheritance should be supported (in which case, see OO Prescription 2).

                                      ———  ———

As explained in the discussion of OO Prescription 2 in Chapter 8, we do not include inheritance
support as a mandatory component of our Manifesto; we merely require that if inheritance is
supported at all, then that support shall be based on the model described in Part IV of this book.
Note, however, that we would very much like to include such support!—especially since (as we will
argue in the next chapter) we see our inheritance model in large part as a logical consequence of our
type theory. For that reason, we have tried not to prescribe, proscribe, or even strongly suggest
anything now that might preclude our ability to include such support later.


OO VERY STRONG SUGGESTION 2: TYPES AND OPERATORS UNBUNDLED

Operator definitions should be logically distinct from the definitions of the types of their parameters
and results, not “bundled in” with those latter definitions (though the operators required by RM
Prescriptions 4, 5, 8, and 21 might be exceptions in this regard).

                                      ———  ———

In object systems, operators (“methods”) are typically bundled in with types (“classes”), meaning
that the definition of any given operator is made part of the definition of some type. In the
discussion of RM Prescription 3 in Chapter 6, for example, we might have included the definition of
the read-only operator REFLECT—which, you will recall, takes a point with cartesian coordinates
(x,y) and returns the “inverse” point with cartesian coordinates (-x,-y)—as part of the definition of
the type POINT. But suppose we were to define an operator PERP_DIST that computes the
perpendicular distance of some point from some line. Should PERP_DIST be bundled with type
POINT or type LINE? Whichever it is, why? What are the implications?
       As another example, consider the operator “*”, which might be used (among other things) to
multiply a speed by a time to give a distance. Which type does “*” belong to? SPEED? TIME?
Perhaps DISTANCE? Surely the only sensible answer is “None of the above.”
       We see, therefore, that the idea of an operator being bundled in with some type works just fine
so long as the operator in question takes exactly one operand, as REFLECT does. But as soon as it
takes two or more, as PERP_DIST and “*” do, a degree of arbitrariness, artificiality, asymmetry,
and awkwardness inevitably creeps in.
       So let us step back for a moment. Why are operators bundled in with types anyway, in object
systems? One answer to this question seems to be that those operators need (or might need)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        255
Chapter 11                                                                          OO Very Strong Suggestions


privileged access: access, that is, to the physical representation of instances of the type in question.
In other words, those operators need (or might need) to invoke what we called protected operators
in Chapter 3. Note: We are using the fuzzy term “instances” here as a convenient shorthand for
“values and/or variables.”
       But we already have a mechanism for dealing with privileged access: viz., the security
mechanism.1 Would it not be better, therefore, to unbundle operators from types, and instead use
the security mechanism—whatever that mechanism might be—to control, directly or indirectly,
which operators are allowed access to which types (more accurately, access to the physical
representation of instances of those types)? We believe it would. To be specific, we believe this
approach has the advantages that:

    ■   Operators can be permitted access to the physical representations of instances of as many
        types as desired, instead of being limited to just one.

    ■   The arbitrariness, artificiality, asymmetry, and awkwardness inherent in the bundling scheme
        are all eliminated.

      Further advantages are discussed under IM Prescription 17 in Chapter 14. What is more,
adopting this approach implies that:

    ■   D does not need to support the concept, found in some object systems, that operators have a
        distinguished or receiver or target operand. (In a typical object system, if operator Op is
        bundled with type T, then Op is invoked by “sending a message” to a specific target operand:
        namely, an instance of type T. That target operand is, typically, given special treatment, both
        syntactic and semantic, a fact that can have a variety of undesirable consequences. But if the
        present suggestion is implemented, all operands can be treated uniformly. Again, see Chapter
        14 for further discussion.)

    ■   D also does not need to support either the concept of protected instance variables or the
        concept of friends. (See reference [90] for an explanation of these concepts. Basically, they
        are both ad hoc techniques for getting around the limitation that one operator is permitted
        privileged access to instances of only one type.)

      To repeat, we believe the problem all such notions are intended to address is better solved by
judicious application of the system’s security mechanism. As already noted, in fact, the problem in
question degenerates to nothing more than that of deciding which operator definitions shall be
allowed to make use of which protected operators. Note: We will go on in Chapter 14 to suggest
that use of those protected operators should be limited to just a very small, well defined set of
operators: selectors, THE_ operators, and one or two others. And even there we believe the
operator definitions in question can be system generated in many cases, though not all.


1
  Of course, we are talking about database systems specifically here. Programming systems typically do not have a
security mechanism, and this lack perhaps accounts for the approach typically taken by object systems. Of course, we
do not actually prescribe a security mechanism for D either, for reasons explained in Chapters 1 and 3, but we do
assume that any industrial strength D will include some security support.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                      256
Chapter 11                                                                        OO Very Strong Suggestions


OO VERY STRONG SUGGESTION 3: SINGLE-LEVEL STORE

D should support the concept of single-level storage.

                                          ———  ———

The concept of a “single-level storage model” was proposed—under the name of direct reference—
by one of the present authors as far back as 1976 [42], and it is supported by most object systems
today (though not by the “object/relational” DBMSs that became available from several vendors in
the 1990s, because those DBMSs are based on SQL). The general idea is simply that there should
be no unnecessary differences between access to data in the database and access to data not in the
database; all such access should look the same to the user. And in Tutorial D, of course, it does.
For example, a Tutorial D scalar expression can reference an attribute value within some tuple
within some relation, and it makes no difference whether the relation in question is in the database
or “in main memory.” Note in particular, therefore, that there is no notion in Tutorial D of
database data having to be “copied into main memory” before it can be processed. The net effect is
that it makes no logical difference whether a given piece of data resides in main memory,1 online
secondary storage, tertiary backup storage, etc. What is important is whether it is persistent or not.


EXERCISES

11.1    (For discussion) Under OO Very Strong Suggestion 1, we said the Manifesto tries not to
        prescribe, proscribe, or even strongly suggest anything that might preclude its ability to
        include inheritance support later. Do you think it succeeds in this respect?

11.2    Under OO Very Strong Suggestion 2, we said that D does not need to support the concept,
        found in some object systems, that operators have a distinguished or receiver or target
        operand. Such operators are sometimes known as selfish methods, because they have to
        access that special operand by means of a special parameter that is often called SELF. What
        are the advantages and disadvantages of selfish methods?

11.3    What are the advantages of a single-level store? What are the disadvantages?




1
  It is relevant to observe here that main-memory DBMSs have been commercially available for some time; indeed,
they are becoming increasingly important, for a variety of pragmatic reasons.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                   257
                                           Part IV:

                   SUBTYPING AND INHERITANCE

Essentially, this part of the book does for our model of subtyping and inheritance what Parts I-III do
for The Third Manifesto. Thus, Chapter 12 corresponds to Part I (it contains an overall introduction
to the topic); Chapter 13 corresponds to Part II (it contains formal definitions); and Chapters 14, 15,
and 16 correspond to Part III (they contain extended but informal explanations and discussions of
those formal definitions). More specifically:

 ■    Chapter 14 discusses single inheritance and scalar types only.

 ■    Chapter 15 elaborates on the ideas discussed in Chapter 14 to deal with multiple inheritance
      as well.

 ■    Finally, Chapter 16 goes on to take tuple and relation types into account too.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        258