                                             Chapter 12

                                       Preliminaries

As noted under OO Prescription 2 in Chapter 8, there is currently no consensus (at least in the data
management literature) on a formal, rigorous, and abstract type inheritance model, and we have
therefore been more or less forced to develop such a model of our own. In this part of the book, we
describe that model in depth.
       We should say immediately that we would like this effort on our part not to be seen as just an
academic exercise. Rather, we would like our proposal to be considered by the community at large
as a serious contender for filling the gap alluded to above (i.e., as a candidate for the role that is
“formal, rigorous, and abstract” and can be generally agreed upon by that “community at large”).
We offer it here in that spirit.
       We begin by raising the question of why this topic might be worth investigating in the first
place. There are at least two possible answers to this question:

 ■    First, the ideas of subtyping and inheritance do seem to arise naturally in the real world. That
      is, it is not at all unusual to encounter situations in which (more or less by definition) all
      values of a given type have certain properties in common, while some of those values have
      additional properties of their own. For example, all ellipses have an area, while some
      ellipses—namely, those that happen to be circles—have a radius as well; thus, we might say
      that type ELLIPSE has a subtype CIRCLE, and further that the subtype inherits the property
      of having an area from its supertype ELLIPSE (but circles also have certain properties of their
      own that ellipses in general do not). Thus, subtyping and inheritance look as if they might be
      useful tools for “modeling reality.”

 ■    Second, if we can recognize such general patterns—patterns of subtyping and inheritance, that
      is—and build intelligence regarding them into our application and system software, we might
      be able to achieve certain practical economies. For example, a program that works for
      ellipses might work for circles too, even if it was originally written with no thought for circles
      at all (perhaps type CIRCLE had not even been defined at the time the program was written).

       We remark that much of the existing literature seems to be concerned more with the second of
these points than it is with the first—that is, it seems to be principally interested in inheritance as a
mechanism for designing, building, and using (and reusing) programs. Our own focus, by contrast,
is more on the first point than the second; we are interested in inheritance more as a conceptual tool
for designing, building, and using (and reusing) data structures. In other words, we are seeking an
inheritance model that can be used to “model reality” (or, at least, certain aspects of reality), in the
same kind of way that the relational model can be used to model certain aspects of reality. To put it
yet another way, we are interested as always in the possibility of constructing an abstract model,
not in matters of implementation merely. (As in earlier chapters, however, the discussions and
explanations in what follows do sometimes touch on implementation matters for purposes of
clarification.)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          259
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                                    Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


       Caveat: Before going any further, we should warn you that this whole topic is considerably
more complex than you might expect. The trouble is, although “the basic idea of inheritance is
quite simple” [131], the devil is in the details: You have to study the topic in its entirety (and, we
might add, extremely closely and carefully) in order to come properly to grips with it—in particular,
to appreciate the fact that it is not at all as straightforward as it might seem at first sight. All of
which goes some way, perhaps, to justify the possibly rather surprising length of this part of the
book (especially Chapter 14).
       There is another point we need to warn you of, too. The fact is, there is not even consensus in
the literature on the meaning of such basic terms as subtype and inheritance, let alone on an entire
inheritance model. Here also, therefore, we have been more or less forced to introduce our own
definitions; and while we have naturally done our best to define terms and concepts in a manner that
makes sense to us, you need to be aware that different definitions can be found elsewhere.1 We
defend our definitions—and our entire model, come to that—on the grounds that, among other
things, they are mostly just a logical consequence of our type theory as described in earlier parts of
this book. In other words, we think it would be inconsistent to agree with the Manifesto’s approach
to types in general but not to agree with the proposed inheritance model. But you must be the judge
of this claim, of course.
       One last introductory point: The subject of type inheritance has a lot to do with data in
general, of course, but not much to do with persistent or database data in particular (there is little or
nothing about inheritance that applies to persistent data only). For simplicity, therefore—and
despite our remarks in Chapter 1 regarding the general focus in this book on database management
specifically—most of the examples in this part of the book are expressed in terms of local data
instead of database data.


TOWARD A TYPE INHERITANCE MODEL

To repeat, we use the term inheritance to refer to that phenomenon according to which we can
sensibly say, for example, that every circle is an ellipse, and hence that all properties that apply to
ellipses in general apply to—i.e., are inherited by—circles in particular. For example, every ellipse
has an area, and therefore every circle has an area too. More formally, we say we have two types,
ELLIPSE and CIRCLE, such that ELLIPSE is a supertype of CIRCLE and CIRCLE is a subtype
of ELLIPSE; we also say, somewhat loosely, that all properties that apply to the supertype
necessarily apply to the subtype as well. Of course, the converse is not true: The subtype will have
properties of its own that do not apply to the supertype (again speaking somewhat loosely). For
example, circles have a radius, but ellipses in general do not.
       Incidentally, a point arises here that beginners sometimes find a little confusing: namely, that
a subtype has a subset of the values but a superset of the properties. For example, the subtype
CIRCLE contains a subset of the values of the supertype ELLIPSE, but an individual circle has all
of the properties of an ellipse and more besides. Note: For exactly such reasons, some writers
prefer to avoid the “sub and super” terminology and talk of descendants and ancestors instead (see,

1
  In fact, it has been suggested—see references [2], [19], [118], and [137], among others—that there are many kinds of
inheritance, and hence many sets of concepts and many definitions of terms, that are all distinct from one another and
yet overlap in various ways.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       260
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                            Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


e.g, reference [100]); however, we think this latter nomenclature has problems of its own, and
therefore choose to stay (mostly) with the “sub and super” terminology.
       By the way, it should be understood that constraints are properties too, of a kind, and are
therefore inherited too—where by constraints we mean type constraints specifically, a convention
we will adhere to throughout this part of the book (barring explicit statements to the contrary).
Thus, e.g., any constraint that applies to ellipses in general also applies, necessarily, to circles in
particular (for if it did not, then some circles would not be ellipses). For example, if ellipses are
subject to the constraint that the length of their major semiaxis a is greater than or equal to that of
their minor semiaxis b, then this same constraint must be satisfied by circles also. (For circles, of
course, a and b coincide in the radius r, and this particular constraint is therefore satisfied trivially.)
       Now, it is important in this context—as in all others!—to distinguish very carefully between
values and variables. When we say that every circle is an ellipse, what we mean, more precisely, is
that every circle value is an ellipse value. We certainly do not mean that every circle variable is an
ellipse variable: i.e., that a variable of declared type CIRCLE is a variable of declared type
ELLIPSE, and hence can contain a value that is an ellipse and not a circle. In other words, and
speaking somewhat loosely once again, inheritance applies to values, not variables (although
naturally there are implications for variables too, as will be seen). We conjecture that much of the
confusion we observe in this field—and there is a lot of it—is due precisely to a failure to
distinguish properly between values and variables.


SINGLE VS. MULTIPLE INHERITANCE

As explained in Chapter 8, there are two broad “flavors” of type inheritance, single and multiple.
Loosely speaking, single inheritance means each subtype has just one supertype and inherits
properties from just that one type, while multiple inheritance means a subtype can have any number
of supertypes and inherits properties from all of them. Obviously, the former is a special case of the
latter.
        Now, we do believe that support for multiple inheritance is desirable; in fact, as noted under
OO Prescription 2 in Chapter 8, we believe that if inheritance is supported at all, it must be multiple.
Despite this fact, our strategy in investigating this topic has been (a) to construct a sound model of
single inheritance first, and then (b) to extend that model to incorporate multiple inheritance
subsequently. Our reason for adopting this perhaps rather conservative approach is that even single
inheritance raises numerous tricky questions; it therefore seemed reasonable to try to find good
answers to those questions first, before having to concern ourselves too much about the additional
complexities of multiple inheritance. Of course, we did try not to build anything into our model for
single inheritance that might have precluded later extensions to deal with multiple inheritance, and
it is a measure of our cautious optimism regarding our single-inheritance model that it does seem (at
least to us) to extend gracefully to the multiple-inheritance case.
        Be that as it may, the structure of Chapters 14 and 15 reflects this history:

 ■    Chapter 14 discusses and illustrates a series of detailed prescriptions (“IM Prescriptions”)
      that together constitute a basis for the kind of robust inheritance model we are seeking, at least
      for the case of single inheritance only.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            261
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                                        Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


    ■    Chapter 15 then goes on to extend the model discussed in Chapter 14 to incorporate multiple
         inheritance as well.


SCALARS, TUPLES, AND RELATIONS

We said earlier that inheritance applies to values, not variables. We were, however, making a tacit
assumption at that point that the term values meant scalar values specifically. As explained under
RM Prescription 1 in Chapter 6, of course, such values can have an arbitrarily complex internal
structure or physical representation, but that internal structure is part of the implementation, not the
model, and it is hidden from the user. Thus, for example, ellipses and circles can have a
complicated internal structure and yet still be regarded as scalar values (as we already know). More
to the point, inheritance has implications for nonscalar values—in particular, tuple and relation
values—too, since such nonscalar values are ultimately built out of scalar values. But we obviously
cannot even begin to talk sensibly about those implications until we have pinned down what
subtyping and inheritance mean for scalar values specifically.
       Throughout Chapters 14 and 15, therefore, we take the unqualified term value to mean
a scalar value specifically. By the same token, throughout those two chapters we take the
unqualified terms type, subtype, and supertype to mean scalar types, subtypes, and supertypes
specifically, and we take the unqualified terms variable, operator, expression, and result to mean
scalar variables, operators, expressions, and results specifically.1 Note, however, that formal
statements in those chapters—the IM Prescriptions themselves in particular—are deliberately
worded in such a way as to allow, e.g., the term value to be taken to mean a scalar value or a tuple
value or a relation value, as the context demands. They are also deliberately worded in such a way
as to be applicable to multiple inheritance as well as single, barring explicit statements to the
contrary.
       To repeat, scalar values have no user-visible structure. But they do have associated operators,
of course, and it follows that when we talk as we did earlier of inheritance of “properties,” what we
mean, primarily, is inheritance of operators. (More precisely, we mean inheritance of read-only
operators specifically, thanks to our recognition of the fact that inheritance applies to values, not
variables—though once again, of course, there are implications for variables too.) For example,
when we say that every circle has an area because every ellipse has an area, what we mean is that
subtype CIRCLE inherits a (read-only) operator, AREA say, from supertype ELLIPSE. In other
words, we are interested in what is sometimes called behavioral inheritance.
       Note: Much of the literature contrasts behavioral inheritance with structural inheritance.
This latter term refers to inheritance of physical representations;2 as such, it is properly an
implementation matter, not part of the model. Of course, we certainly do not preclude such
inheritance, but, to repeat, it is not part of the model. We observe, however, that much of the

1
    By operators here we really mean read-only operators, since update operators have no type.
2
  There are those who would dispute this claim (see the brief explanation of “the EXTENDS relationship” in the section
“Concluding Remarks” at the end of the chapter). We stand by it, however, so long as the types under discussion are
scalar types specifically. The true state of affairs is too complicated to deal with adequately here (part of the problem is
precisely that the literature does not always distinguish properly between scalar and nonscalar types). See Appendix G
for further discussion.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                            262
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                                     Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


literature, especially in the object world, does tend to assume that inheritance means—or at least
includes—inheritance of physical representations; it further tends to assume that some operators, at
least, depend on those physical representations. We regard this state of affairs as evidence of
confusion over the distinction between model and implementation, and choose not to discuss it
further here.
       Turning now to tuple and relation types: As noted earlier, the notions of scalar subtyping and
inheritance do have implications for tuples and relations, because tuples and relations are ultimately
constructed out of scalar components. For example, a relation with an attribute of type ELLIPSE
might include some tuples in which the value corresponding to that attribute is specifically a circle,
not “just an ellipse.” In Chapter 16, we consider the question of what is involved in extending our
inheritance model for scalar types (for both single and multiple inheritance, as discussed in Chapters
14 and 15) to take tuple and relation types into account as well.


THE RUNNING EXAMPLE

We now introduce a running example that will serve as a basis for much of the discussion in
subsequent chapters (and in Appendixes F and G as well). The example deliberately involves scalar
types only and single inheritance only; as already indicated, our model does include support for
nonscalar types and multiple inheritance, but we feel that scalar types and single inheritance suffice
to illustrate most of the points we need to make at this stage. If we do need to say something that
either (a) applies to scalar and not nonscalar types (or the other way around), or (b) applies to single
and not multiple inheritance (or the other way around), we will clearly indicate that such is the case.
       The running example is based on a collection of geometric types: PLANE_FIGURE,
ELLIPSE, POLYGON, and so on (refer to Fig. 12.1). In accordance with RM Prescription 1, each
of those types is a named set of values; for example, there is a set of values named ELLIPSE, and
every value in that set is some specific ellipse.1 The types are arranged into what is called a type
hierarchy.
╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                         ┌──────────────┐                        ║
║                         │ PLANE_FIGURE │                        ║
║                         └──────┬───────┘                        ║
║                 ───────────────┴───────────────                 ║
║          ┌─────────────┐               ┌─────────────┐          ║
║          │   ELLIPSE   │               │   POLYGON   │          ║
║          └─────────────┘               └─────────────┘          ║
║          ┌─────────────┐               ┌─────────────┐          ║
║          │   CIRCLE    │               │ RECTANGLE │            ║
║          └─────────────┘               └─────────────┘          ║
║                                        ┌─────────────┐          ║
║                                        │   SQUARE    │          ║
║                                        └─────────────┘          ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 12.1: Example of a type hierarchy

1
  More precisely, it is an ellipse at some specific position in two-dimensional euclidean space. We assume for the sake
of the example that geometric figures that occupy different positions in that space but are otherwise identical are
distinct.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        263
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                                     Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


      We should say immediately that our choice of a slightly academic example is deliberate.
While it might be objected that geometric figures are not the kind of thing we expect to find in a
typical database, in fact there are several advantages to such an example, the main one being that
the semantics of the various types involved are or should be crystal clear to everyone. We can
therefore avoid the kind of unproductive debates that tend to arise when “fuzzier” examples are
chosen. For instance, suppose we had chosen an example involving a type BOOK. Are two copies
of the same book two instances of that type or only one? What if the two copies are of different
editions? What if one is a translation of the other? Is a journal a book? Is a magazine? And so on.
      We also observe that type hierarchies as such will certainly be inadequate when we get to
multiple inheritance (when we will have to replace them by more general type graphs). However,
they are sufficient for the purposes of the present chapter.
      To revert to Fig. 12.1: The type hierarchy in that figure should be more or less self-
explanatory, of course; it shows, for example, that type RECTANGLE is a subtype of supertype
POLYGON, which means that all rectangles are polygons, but the converse is not true (some
polygons are not rectangles). As a consequence, all properties that apply to polygons in general
apply to—i.e., are inherited by—rectangles in particular, but the converse is not true (rectangles
have properties of their own that do not apply to polygons in general). Note: Recall that
“properties” here essentially means operators and constraints; thus, operators and constraints that
apply to polygons apply to rectangles too (because a rectangle is a polygon), but some operators and
constraints that apply to rectangles do not apply to mere polygons.
      Now, Tutorial D as defined in Chapter 5 did not include any support for inheritance.
However, we do need a way of telling the system which types are subtypes of which (in other
words, a way of defining type hierarchies). So let us extend Tutorial D to support a new syntactic
category, <user scalar nonroot type def>, as an alternative form of <user scalar type def> (the
existing form, as you will recall from Chapter 5, being <user scalar root type def>). A <user
scalar nonroot type def> in turn includes an <is def> (“IS definition”), thereby enabling us to write
type definitions like these:
       TYPE ELLIPSE
            IS { PLANE_FIGURE POSSREP { A LENGTH, B LENGTH, CTR POINT
                                        CONSTRAINT A  B } } ;

       TYPE CIRCLE
            IS { ELLIPSE CONSTRAINT THE_A ( ELLIPSE ) = THE_B ( ELLIPSE )
            POSSREP { R = THE_A ( ELLIPSE ) , CTR = THE_CTR ( ELLIPSE ) } } ;

       Now the system knows that CIRCLE is a subtype of ELLIPSE (loosely, every circle “is a”
ellipse), and hence that operators and constraints that apply to ellipses in general apply to circles in
particular.
       Let us take a closer look at these type definitions. First of all, we assume as we did in Chapter
6 that ellipses are always oriented such that their major axis is horizontal and their minor axis
vertical. Thus, ellipses might indeed have a possrep1 consisting of their semiaxes a and b (and their



1
  We remind you that we take the unqualified term possible representation, or the abbreviated form possrep, to refer to
a declared possrep specifically, barring explicit statements to the contrary.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        264
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                           Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


center). By contrast, circles might have a possrep consisting of their radius r (and their center).
Observe now that:

 ■    For type ELLIPSE, we have specified that every ellipse “is a” plane figure. We have also
      specified the {a,b,ctr} possrep in the usual way, with what in Chapter 5 we called a <possrep
      constraint> to the effect that a  b (as in Chapter 6).

 ■    For type CIRCLE, by contrast, we have specified that every circle “is a” ellipse. We have
      also specified an additional constraint to the effect that a = b. (That constraint is not,
      however, a possrep constraint; in fact, type CIRCLE has no possrep constraint.) Along with
      that constraint, moreover, we have specified the {r,ctr} possrep for circles, and we have
      indicated how that possrep is derived from that for ellipses. Observe the use of the supertype
      name ELLIPSE within the constraint—also within the derived possrep definition—to denote
      an arbitrary value of the supertype in question (i.e., an arbitrary ellipse).

       Note, therefore, that the type constraint for a given type is specified by means of either a
<possrep def> or an <is def>, depending on which is included in the type definition. (Note too that
the first of these alternatives is the only one available in the absence of inheritance support.)

A Note on Possible Representations

It should be clear that every possrep for ellipses is necessarily, albeit implicitly, a possrep for circles
as well, because circles are ellipses. (Of course, the converse is not true—a possrep for circles is
not necessarily a possrep for ellipses.) Thus, we might regard possreps as further “properties” that
are inherited by subtypes from supertypes. However, we do not regard that inherited possrep as a
declared one in the sense of RM Prescription 4, because to do so would lead to a contradiction
between IM Prescription 19, q.v., and RM Prescription 5. Thus, to say that type CIRCLE inherits a
possrep from type ELLIPSE is only a façon de parler—it does not carry any formal weight.
       To pursue the point a moment longer: Let type T' be a subtype of type T. Then it will often
be the case in practice that T' does have a possrep—a declared possrep, that is—that is similar
(possibly identical) to some possrep for T. This fact suggests that it might be convenient in practice
to have some syntactic shorthand for declaring a possrep for T', perhaps along the lines of “same as
possrep PR for T but subtracting component(s) x and adding component(s) y.” However, we see
this issue as a purely syntactic one and secondary to our main purpose.
       By the way, it is certainly possible for T and T' to have possreps that differ from each other
quite markedly. For example, let T and T' be PENTAGON and REGULAR_PENTAGON,
respectively. Then T could have a possrep consisting of five points (the five vertices), while T' has
one consisting of just two points (the center and one vertex). However, it is always the case—in
fact, it must always be the case—that each possrep for the subtype is expressible in terms of, and
thus derivable from, each possrep for the supertype.

Terminology

We now introduce a number of further terms and concepts, most of them fairly self-explanatory (in
any case, they are all amplified in later chapters):




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            265
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                          Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


 ■    A supertype of a supertype is itself a supertype (e.g., POLYGON is a supertype of SQUARE).

 ■    Every type is a supertype of itself (e.g., ELLIPSE is a supertype of ELLIPSE).

 ■    If T is a supertype of T' and T and T' are distinct, then T is a proper supertype of T' (e.g.,
      POLYGON is a proper supertype of SQUARE).

Analogous remarks apply to subtypes, of course. Thus:
 ■    A subtype of a subtype is itself a subtype (e.g., SQUARE is a subtype of POLYGON).

 ■    Every type is a subtype of itself (e.g., ELLIPSE is a subtype of ELLIPSE).

 ■    If T' is a subtype of T and T' and T are distinct, then T' is a proper subtype of T (e.g.,
      SQUARE is a proper subtype of POLYGON).

Moreover:

 ■    If T is a proper supertype of T' and there is no type that is both a proper subtype of T and a
      proper supertype of T', then T is an immediate supertype of T' and T' is an immediate
      subtype of T (e.g., RECTANGLE is an immediate supertype of SQUARE, and SQUARE is
      an immediate subtype of RECTANGLE).

 ■    A root type is a type with no proper supertype (e.g., PLANE_FIGURE is a root type); a leaf
      type is a type with no proper subtype (e.g., SQUARE is a leaf type). Note: Strictly speaking,
      a given type can be said to be a root or leaf type only in the context of some specific type
      hierarchy or type graph. For example, type RECTANGLE is a leaf type in the hierarchy that
      results from by deleting type SQUARE from the hierarchy of Fig. 12.1. Informally, however,
      we usually take the context as understood.

      Incidentally, we can now give a precise characterization of single inheritance: Single
inheritance means, precisely, that every proper subtype has exactly one immediate supertype.

The Disjointness Assumption

It is convenient for tutorial purposes to adopt the following simplifying assumption:

 ■    If types T1 and T2 are such that neither is a subtype of the other, then they are disjoint—i.e.,
      no value is of both type T1 and type T2. For example, no value is both an ellipse and a
      polygon.

      Now, this assumption, which we call the disjointness assumption, is certainly valid as long as
we limit our attention to single inheritance only; in that context, in fact, it is implied (perhaps not
very obviously) by IM Prescription 8, q.v. It will cease to be valid when we get to multiple
inheritance; as already noted, however, we are emphasizing single inheritance in this preliminary
chapter, and so we will take it as valid until further notice. Here are some immediate consequences
of the assumption:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            266
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                                  Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


    ■   Distinct root types are disjoint, and hence distinct type hierarchies are disjoint also (no value
        is of two distinct types T1 and T2 such that T1 and T2 are part of two distinct type
        hierarchies).

    ■   Distinct subtypes of the same supertype are disjoint unless one is a subtype of the other. In
        particular, distinct leaf types are disjoint.

    ■   (Important!) Every value has exactly one most specific type. For example, a given value
        might be “just an ellipse” and not a circle, meaning its most specific type is ELLIPSE (in the
        real world, some ellipses are not circles).

    ■   In fact, following on from the previous point, if value v is of most specific type T, then the set
        of types possessed by v is, precisely, the set consisting of all supertypes of T (a set that
        includes T itself, of course). In other words, v is of every type that is a supertype of T and is
        of no other type.

       One reason the disjointness assumption is desirable is that it avoids certain ambiguities that
might otherwise occur. For suppose, contrariwise, that some value v could be of two distinct types
T1 and T2, neither of which was a subtype of the other. Suppose further that an operator named Op
has been defined for type T1 and another operator with the same name Op has been defined for type
T2.1 Then an invocation of Op with argument v would be ambiguous.
       We note in passing that analogous ambiguities do not arise over constraints. For if type T1 is
subject to constraint C1 and type T2 is subject to constraint C2, and if constraints C1 and C2
conflict, then it simply means that types T1 and T2 are disjoint (because no value v can possibly
satisfy both C1 and C2). Loosely speaking, in fact, it is necessary and sufficient that C1 and C2
conflict in order for T1 and T2 to be disjoint.
       Finally, we have said that the disjointness assumption applies to single inheritance only;
however, there are situations even with multiple inheritance in which certain types are required to
be disjoint. Unfortunately, it is always possible that the type designer could make a mistake and
specify types that are supposed to be disjoint but in fact are not. For example, the designer might
specify types RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS as subtypes of type PARALLELOGRAM and forget
that some parallelograms are both a rectangle and a rhombus. The consequences of such violations
will be unpredictable, in general. Although this fact need not concern us from the point of view of
the model—a violation is simply a violation, and there is no need within the model to spell out what
the consequences might be—in practice, we would hope that some kind of mechanical aid would be
available to help the designer avoid such errors.

Substitutability

By definition, if T' is a subtype of T, then all operators that apply to values of type T apply to values
of type T' too. For example, if AREA(e) is valid, where e is an ellipse, then AREA(c), where c is a


1
  In other words, Op is polymorphic. What is more, the kind of polymorphism involved could be either overloading or
inclusion polymorphism. See IM Prescription 9 in Chapter 14 for further explanation.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                    267
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                         Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


circle, must be valid too. In other words, wherever the system expects a value of type ELLIPSE, we
can always substitute a value of type CIRCLE (because, to say it again, circles are ellipses).
       Now, this matter of substitutability is in many ways the whole point of inheritance. We
claimed earlier that one reason for wanting to support inheritance in the first place is that (for
example) a program that works for ellipses might work for circles too, even if it was originally
written with no thought for circles. Well, it should be clear now that it is substitutability that makes
such an objective attainable.
       Observe, incidentally, that there is another logical difference here that we need to be very
careful over: viz., that between the parameters in terms of which an operator is defined, with their
declared types, and the corresponding arguments to some invocation of that operator, with their
actual—i.e., most specific—types. In the AREA example, for instance, the operator is presumably
defined in terms of a parameter of declared type ELLIPSE, but the most specific type of the
argument c in the invocation AREA(c) is CIRCLE. (Indeed, the declared type of the expression
denoting that argument might be CIRCLE too.)

A Note on Physical Representations

Although we are primarily concerned with a model of inheritance, not with implementation issues,
there are certain implementation issues that do need to be understood if the overall concept of
inheritance is to be properly understood in turn—and now we come to one such (which will turn out
to be important at several points in subsequent chapters):

 ■    The fact that T' is a proper subtype of T does not imply that the physical representation of T'
      values is the same as that of T values.

      For example, ellipses and circles might be physically represented by their center and semiaxes
and their center and radius, respectively (though we know from Chapter 3 that there is no need, in
general, for a physical representation to be the same as any declared possrep). As another example,
it might be that the built-in type INTEGER is a proper subtype of the built-in type RATIONAL, but
they are implemented internally in 32-bit two’s-complement notation and IEEE 64-bit floating-point
notation, respectively. Note: In fact, we already know from Chapters 1 and 6 that there is no
logical reason why all values of the same type need have the same physical representation. For
example, some points might be physically represented in cartesian coordinates and others in polar;
some temperatures might be physically represented in Celsius and others in Fahrenheit; some
integers might be physically represented in decimal and others in binary; and so on.

More on Type Hierarchies

Here now is a precise definition of the term type hierarchy. Basically, a type hierarchy TH is a
special kind of graph. The graph consists of a finite set N of nodes and a finite set DA of directed
arcs and satisfies the following properties:

 a.   TH is empty if N is empty (in which case DA is necessarily empty too), otherwise it is
      nonempty.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         268
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                           Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


 b.   Each node is given the name of a type. No two nodes have the same name.

 c.   Each arc connects exactly two distinct nodes and represents a directed path from one of those
      two nodes (the parent) to the other (the child). There is a directed arc from parent T to child
      T' if and only if type T is an immediate supertype of type T'.

 d.   Each parent is connected to one or more children. Each child is connected to exactly one
      parent.

 e.   Node Y is a descendant of node X if it is a child of X or a child of a descendant of X. No node
      is a descendant of itself. (Also, node X is an ancestor of node Y if and only if node Y is a
      descendant of node X. No node is an ancestor of itself.)

 f.   A node connected to no parent is a root node. Types corresponding to root nodes are called
      root types. Note: If TH is nonempty, it has exactly one root node, otherwise it has no root
      node at all.

 g.   A node connected to no children is a leaf node. Types corresponding to leaf nodes are called
      leaf types.

       We remark that type hierarchies per se are not part of our inheritance model as such—they are
merely an intuitively convenient way of depicting supertype/subtype relationships, which are.
Indeed, type hierarchies play a role in our inheritance model analogous to that played by tables in
the relational model: Tables per se are not part of the relational model as such, they are merely an
intuitively convenient way of depicting relations, which are.
       We also remark that type hierarchies are known by a variety of different names, the following
among them:

 ■    Class hierarchies (on the grounds that types are sometimes called classes, especially in the
      object world)

 ■    Generalization hierarchies (on the grounds that, e.g., an ellipse is a generalization of a circle)

 ■    Specialization hierarchies (on the grounds that, e.g., a circle is a specialization of an ellipse)

 ■    Inheritance hierarchies (on the grounds that, e.g., circles inherit properties from ellipses)

 ■    Is-a hierarchies (on the grounds that, e.g., every circle “is a” ellipse)

and so on (this is not an exhaustive list).

Syntax

Here for purposes of reference is a summary (covering both single and multiple inheritance) of our
proposal for extending the Tutorial D syntax for <user scalar type def>. Detailed explanations are
given in Chapters 14 and 15. Note: The syntax of <is def>, q.v., has changed slightly from that




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           269
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                       Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


given in reference [83]; to be specific, everything following the keyword IS is now enclosed in
braces.
       <user scalar type def>
            ::=   <user scalar root type def>
                | <user scalar nonroot type def>

       <user scalar root type def>
            ::=   TYPE <user scalar type name>
                  [ ORDINAL ] [ UNION ] <possrep def list>

     UNION must be specified if and only if the root type being defined is a union type. The
<possrep def list> must be empty if and only if the root type being defined is a dummy type. Note:
Every dummy type is necessarily a union type. A type that is not a dummy type is a regular type.
      <user scalar nonroot type def>
           ::=   TYPE <user scalar type name> [ ORDINAL ] [ UNION ] <is def>

      UNION must be specified if and only if the nonroot type being defined is a union type.
      <is def>
           ::=     <single inheritance is def>
                 | <multiple inheritance is def>
      <single inheritance is def>
           ::=   IS { <scalar type name> <possrep or specialization details> }
      <possrep or specialization details>
           ::=   <possrep def list>
               | <additional constraint def> [ <derived possrep def list> ]

      Let the immediate supertype of the nonroot type being defined be IST. The <possrep def
list> must be specified if IST is a dummy type; however, it must be empty if (and only if) the
nonroot type being defined is a dummy type. The <additional constraint def> must be specified if
IST is not a dummy type. The <derived possrep def list> must be specified (and must not be
empty) unless IST is either a dummy type or a system-defined type without a possrep.
      <additional constraint def>
           ::=   CONSTRAINT <bool exp>

      The <bool exp> must not mention any variables, but the name of the immediate supertype of
the nonroot type being defined can (and in fact must) be used to denote an arbitrary value of the
supertype in question.
      <derived possrep def>
           ::=   POSSREP [ <possrep name> ]
                 { <derived possrep component def commalist> }
      <derived possrep component def>
           ::=   <possrep component name> = <exp>
      The <exp> must not mention any variables, but the name of an immediate supertype of the
nonroot type being defined can (and in fact must) be used to denote an arbitrary value of the
supertype in question.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       270
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                             Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


      <multiple inheritance is def>
           ::=   IS { <scalar type name commalist> <derived possrep def list> }

      The <scalar type name commalist> must contain at least two <scalar type name>s. The
<derived possrep def list> must be empty if and only if the nonroot type being defined is a dummy
type.

Recursively Defined Types and Headings

We noted in Chapter 6 that (a) the concept of a recursively defined type and (b) the concept of a
recursively defined heading both require some extension if type inheritance is supported. Just to
remind you, Chapter 6 said:

 ■    Scalar type T is recursively defined if there exists some n (n > 0) such that T is a member of a
      certain set S(n), where sets S(1), S(2), etc., form a certain sequence of sets of types.

 ■    Likewise, heading H is recursively defined if there exists some n (n > 0) such that TUPLE H
      or RELATION H is a member of a certain set S(n), where again sets S(1), S(2), etc., form a
      certain sequence of sets of types.

      The required extension is as follows: In the first bullet item, replace “such that T is a
member” by “such that some subtype or supertype of T is a member”; in the second, replace “such
that TUPLE H or RELATION H is a member” by “such that some subtype or supertype of
TUPLE H or RELATION H is a member” (see Chapter 16). For the purposes of the present book,
however, we continue to follow The Principle of Cautious Design [46] and assume, where it makes
any difference, that recursively defined types and headings are not permitted.

Practical Problems

In closing this section, it would be remiss of us not to point out that type inheritance does give rise
to some thorny practical problems. Given the type hierarchy of Fig. 12.1, for example, what should
happen if we try to drop type ELLIPSE? Should there be a way to “alter” or rename type ELLIPSE
without dropping it? Should we be able to introduce a new type as an immediate supertype of an
existing type? What if that existing type is system defined? And so on. Such questions must
clearly be answered in any real implementation, but we do not regard them as issues that affect the
model per se, and we have little to say about them in this book.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

We have presented an introduction to some of the basic ideas of our inheritance model. As noted
earlier in this chapter, however, many other approaches to inheritance are discussed in the literature.
We briefly mention two significant ones here:

 ■    Reference [17] among others discusses what it calls the EXTENDS relationship, which it
      defines as “a single inheritance relationship between two classes whereby the subordinate
      class inherits all of the [structure, also called state] and all of the behavior of the class that it




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              271
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                          Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


       extends.” It gives an example in which class EmployeePerson extends class Person by adding
       “attributes” hireDate and payRate to the ones (name and birthDate) it inherits from class
       Person. Appendix G discusses this idea in more detail. Note: C++ [90], Java [94], and the
       SQL standard [99] all support the EXTENDS relationship.

 ■     Reference [129] among others advocates support for subtables and supertables (not by that
       name, however). This concept might be thought of as an application of “the EXTENDS
       relationship” to tables specifically. (We do not say relations or relvars here because the
       tables in question do not have to be properly relational.) Reference [129] gives an example in
       which a STUDENT table inherits all of the columns of a PERSON table but adds a GPA
       column (“grade point average”). Appendix G discusses this idea in more detail as well. Note:
       The SQL standard [99] supports this one, too.

       Finally, for purposes of reference, and also to give some idea of the scope of our inheritance
model, we close this chapter by giving below a mnemonic list of the 25 IM Prescriptions. Note that
the first 20 take care of scalar types; the last five are needed to take care of tuple and relation types
as well.

 1. Types are sets                                      16. Read-only operator inheritance and value
 2. Subtypes are subsets                                substitutability
 3. “Subtype of” is reflexive                           17. Operator signatures
 4. Proper subtypes                                     18. Read-only parameters to update operators
 5. “Subtype of” is transitive                          19. Update operator inheritance and variable
 6. Immediate subtypes                                  substitutability
 7. Root types disjoint                                 20. Union, dummy, and maximal and minimal
 8. Scalar values with inheritance                      types
 9. Scalar variables with inheritance                   21. Tuple/relation subtypes and supertypes
10. Specialization by constraint                        22. Tuple/relation values with inheritance
11. Assignment with inheritance                         23. Maximal and minimal tuple/relation types
12. Equality etc. with inheritance                      24. Tuple/relation most specific types
13. Join etc. with inheritance                          25. Tuple/relation variables with inheritance
14. TREAT
15. Type testing


EXERCISES

12.1    Explain the concepts of type inheritance and subtype in your own words.

12.2    Distinguish between immediate and proper subtypes.

12.3    What do you understand by the term most specific type?

12.4    What do you understand by the term substitutability?




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          272
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                        Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


12.5   With reference to the type hierarchy of Fig. 12.1, consider a value e of type ELLIPSE. The
       most specific type of e is either ELLIPSE or CIRCLE. What is the least specific type of e?

12.6   Define the terms root type and leaf type.

12.7   State the disjointness assumption. What are some of the implications of that assumption?
       What do you think should replace that assumption if multiple inheritance is supported?
       Note: The latter question was not answered in the body of the chapter; the point of the
       question is simply to get you thinking about the issue, should you feel so inclined, before we
       get to the detailed discussions in Chapter 15.

12.8   Give as precise a definition as you can of the term type hierarchy. (You might like to try
       giving a recursive definition, different from the nonrecursive one given in the body of the
       chapter.) Why are type hierarchies strictly not part of the inheritance model?

12.9   Are possreps inherited? If not, why not?

12.10 Use the syntax sketched in this chapter to give definitions for types RECTANGLE and
      SQUARE from Fig. 12.1. Assume for simplicity that all rectangles are centered on the
      origin, but do not assume that all sides are either vertical or horizontal. What about types
      POLYGON and PLANE_FIGURE?

12.11 Given your answer to Exercise 12.10, define an operator to rotate a specified rectangle
      through 90° about its center.

12.12 (This exercise will probably take longer to read than to answer!) Let TH be a type
      hierarchy. Then:

       ■    Any graph G derived from TH by choosing the node corresponding to some type T and
            deleting (a) all nodes not corresponding to some subtype T' of T, and (b) all arcs
            emanating from those nodes, is also a type hierarchy, with T as its root.

       ■    Any graph derived by deleting a node from the graph G just defined is also a type
            hierarchy (again with T as its root, unless node T was the one deleted), provided that
            deletion of a node is always accompanied by deletion of (a) the arc entering into that
            node and (b) each corresponding immediate subtype node.

       ■    TH itself is also regarded as a type hierarchy derived from TH.

       By contrast, if (a) TH is a type hierarchy with root T, and (b) type T is an immediate
       supertype of type T' and type T' is an immediate supertype of type T'' (and we assume for
       simplicity that type T' is an immediate supertype of no types other than type T''), and (c) G is
       the graph derived from TH by deleting node T' and coalescing the arc connecting nodes T
       and T' and the arc connecting nodes T' and T'' into a single arc connecting nodes T and T'',
       then (d) G is not a type hierarchy (at least, not one that can be derived from TH), because it
       causes T'' to lose some of its inheritance (as it were). For example, the graph that contains




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        273
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                        Chapter 12 / Preliminaries


       just nodes POLYGON and SQUARE from Fig. 12.1 (with a single connecting arc) is not a
       type hierarchy that can be derived from the one in that figure.
             Given the foregoing definitions, how many distinct type hierarchies can be derived
       from that of Fig. 12.1?

12.13 In the body of the chapter we said that if inheritance is supported at all, it must be multiple.
      Why do you think this is? Note: As with the second question in Exercise 12.7, this question
      was not answered in this chapter; again, the point of the question is simply to get you
      thinking about the issue.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       274