                                             Chapter 13

                              The Inheritance Model

In this chapter, we simply state the various IM Prescriptions that go to make up our model of
subtyping and inheritance, with no attempt at discussion or further explanation. The material is
provided primarily for reference; you probably should not even attempt to read it straight through
(at least, not on a first reading).
       A note on terminology: Throughout what follows, we assume that all of the types under
discussion are members of some given set of types S; in particular, the definitions of the terms root
type and leaf type are to be interpreted in the context of that set S. Also, we use the symbols T and
T' generically to refer to a pair of types such that T' is a subtype of T (equivalently, such that T is a
supertype of T'). You might find it helpful to think of T and T' as ELLIPSE and CIRCLE,
respectively; however, keep in mind that (in general) they are not limited to being scalar types
specifically, barring explicit statements to the contrary.


IM PRESCRIPTIONS

 1.   T and T' shall indeed both be types; i.e., each shall be a named set of values.

 2.   Every value in T' shall be a value in T; i.e., the set of values constituting T' shall be a subset of
      the set of values constituting T (in other words, if a value is of type T', it shall also be of type
      T). Moreover, if T and T' are distinct (see IM Prescriptions 3 and 4), then there shall exist at
      least one value of type T that is not of type T'.

 3.   T and T' shall not necessarily be distinct; i.e., every type shall be both a subtype and a
      supertype of itself.

 4.   If and only if types T and T' are distinct, T' shall be a proper subtype of T, and T shall be a
      proper supertype of T'.

 5.   Every subtype of T' shall be a subtype of T. Every supertype of T shall be a supertype of T'.

 6.   If and only if T' is a proper subtype of T and there is no type that is both a proper supertype of
      T' and a proper subtype of T, then T' shall be an immediate subtype of T, and T shall be an
      immediate supertype of T'. A type that is not an immediate subtype of any type shall be a
      root type. A type that is not an immediate supertype of any type shall be a leaf type.

 7.   If T1 and T2 are distinct root types, then they shall be disjoint; i.e., no value shall be of both
      type T1 and type T2.

 8.   Every set of types T1, T2, ..., Tn shall have a common subtype T' such that a given value is of
      each of the types T1, T2, ..., Tn if and only if it is of type T'.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           275
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                 Chapter 13 / The Inheritance Model


 9.   Let scalar variable V be of declared type T. Because of value substitutability (see IM
      Prescription 16), the value v assigned to V at any given time can have any subtype T' of type T
      as its most specific type. We can therefore model V as a named ordered triple of the form
      <DT,MST,v>, where:

      a.   The name of the triple is the name of the variable, V.

      b.   DT is the name of the declared type for variable V.

      c.   MST is the name of the most specific type—also known as the current most specific
           type—for, or of, variable V.

      d.   v is a value of most specific type MST—the current value for, or of, variable V.

      We use the notation DT(V), MST(V), v(V) to refer to the DT, MST, v components,
      respectively, of this model of scalar variable V.
           Now let X be a scalar expression. By definition, X specifies an invocation of some scalar
      operator Op (where the arguments, if any, to that invocation of Op are specified as
      expressions in turn). Thus, the notation DT(V), MST(V), v(V) just introduced can be extended
      in an obvious way to refer to the declared type DT(X), the current most specific type MST(X),
      and the current value v(X), respectively, of X—where DT(X) is DT(Op) and is known at
      compile time, and MST(X) and v(X) refer to the result of evaluating X and are therefore not
      known until run time (in general).

 10. Let T be a regular proper supertype (see IM Prescription 20), and let T' be an immediate
     subtype of T. Then the definition of T' shall specify a specialization constraint SC,
     formulated in terms of T, such that a value shall be of type T' if and only if it is of type T and
     it satisfies constraint SC. There shall exist at least one value of type T that does not satisfy
     constraint SC.

 11. Consider the assignment
      V := X

      (where V is a variable and X is an expression). DT(X) shall be a subtype of DT(V). The
      assignment shall set MST(V) equal to MST(X) and v(V) equal to v(X).

 12. Consider the equality comparison
      Y = X

      (where Y and X are expressions). DT(X) and DT(Y) shall have a nonempty common subtype.
      The comparison shall return TRUE if MST(Y) is equal to MST(X) and v(Y) is equal to v(X),
      FALSE otherwise.

 13. Let rx and ry be relations with a common attribute A, and let the declared types of A in rx and
     ry be DTx(A) and DTy(A), respectively. Consider the join of rx and ry (necessarily over A, at




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         276
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                             Chapter 13 / The Inheritance Model


     least in part). DTx(A) and DTy(A) shall have a nonempty common subtype and hence shall
     also have a most specific common supertype, T say. Then the declared type of A in the result
     of the join shall be T.
          Analogous remarks apply to union, intersection, and difference operators. That is, in
     each case:

     a.   Corresponding attributes of the operands shall be such that their declared types have a
          nonempty common subtype.

     b.   The declared type of the corresponding attribute of the result shall be the corresponding
          most specific common supertype.

 14. Let X be an expression, let T be a type, and let DT(X) and T have a nonempty common
     subtype. Then an operator of the form
     TREAT_AS_T ( X )

     (or logical equivalent thereof) shall be supported. We refer to such operators generically as
     “TREAT” or “TREAT AS” operators; their semantics are as follows. First, if MST(X) is not a
     subtype of T, then a type error shall occur. Otherwise:

     a.   If the TREAT invocation appears in a “source” position (for example, on the right side
          of an assignment), then the declared type of that invocation shall be T, and the
          invocation shall yield a result, r say, with MST(r) equal to MST(X) and v(r) equal to v(X).

     b.   If the TREAT invocation appears in a “target” position (for example, on the left side of
          an assignment), then that invocation shall act as a pseudovariable reference, which
          means it shall actually designate its argument X (more precisely, it shall designate a
          version of X for which DT(X) is equal to T but MST(X) and v(X) are unchanged).

 15. Let X be an expression, let T be a type, and let DT(X) and T have a nonempty common
     subtype. Then a logical operator of the form
     IS_T ( X )

     (or logical equivalent thereof) shall be supported. The operator shall return TRUE if v(X) is
     of type T, FALSE otherwise.

 16. Let Op be a read-only operator, let P be a parameter to Op, and let T be the declared type of
     P. Then the declared type (and therefore, necessarily, the most specific type) of the argument
     A corresponding to P in an invocation of Op shall be allowed to be any subtype T' of T. In
     other words, the read-only operator Op applies to values of type T and therefore, necessarily,
     to values of type T'—The Principle of (Read-Only) Operator Inheritance. It follows that
     such operators are polymorphic, since they apply to values of several different types—The
     Principle of (Read-Only) Operator Polymorphism. It further follows that wherever a value




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      277
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                Chapter 13 / The Inheritance Model


     of type T is permitted, a value of any subtype of T shall also be permitted—The Principle of
     (Value) Substitutability.

 17. Any given operator Op shall have exactly one specification signature, a nonempty set of
     version signatures, and a nonempty set of invocation signatures. For definiteness, assume
     the parameters of Op and the arguments appearing in any given invocation of Op each
     constitute an ordered list of n elements (n  0), such that the ith argument corresponds to the
     ith parameter. Then:

     a.   The specification signature shall denote Op as perceived by potential users. It shall
          consist of the operator name Op, the declared types (in order) of the parameters to Op,
          and the declared type of the result, if any, of executing Op. No two distinct operators
          shall have specification signatures that differ only in the declared types of their results (if
          any). Moreover, let S be a set of types with a nonempty common subtype. Then no two
          distinct operators shall have specification signatures that differ only in that, for some i, j,
          ..., k, the declared types of their ith parameters are distinct members of S, the declared
          types of their jth parameters are distinct members of S, ..., and the declared types of their
          kth parameters are distinct members of S.

     b.   There shall be one version signature for each implementation version V of Op. Each
          such signature shall consist of the operator name Op (and possibly the version name V),
          the declared types (in order) of the parameters to V, and the declared type of the result, if
          any, of executing V.

     c.   There shall be one invocation signature for each possible combination of most specific
          argument types to an invocation of Op. Each such signature shall consist of the operator
          name Op and the pertinent combination of most specific argument types (in order).
          Note: The invocation signatures for Op can easily be derived from the corresponding
          specification signature, but the concepts are logically distinct.

     Every version of Op shall implement the same semantics.

 18. Let Op be an update operator and let P be a parameter to Op that is not subject to update.
     Then Op shall behave as a read-only operator as far as P is concerned, and all relevant aspects
     of IM Prescription 16 shall therefore apply, mutatis mutandis.

 19. Let Op be an update operator, let P be a parameter to Op that is subject to update, and let T be
     the declared type of P. Then it might or might not be the case that the declared type (and
     therefore, necessarily, the current most specific type) of the argument A corresponding to P in
     an invocation of Op shall be allowed to be a proper subtype of type T. It follows that for each
     such update operator Op and for each parameter P to Op that is subject to update, it shall be
     necessary to state explicitly for which proper subtypes of the declared type T of parameter P
     operator Op shall be inherited—The Principle of (Update) Operator Inheritance. (And if
     update operator Op is not inherited in this way by type T', it shall not be inherited by any
     proper subtype of type T' either.) Update operators shall thus be only conditionally




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         278
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                   Chapter 13 / The Inheritance Model


     polymorphic—The Principle of (Update) Operator Polymorphism. If Op is an update
     operator and P is a parameter to Op that is subject to update and T' is a proper subtype of the
     declared type T of P for which Op is inherited, then by definition it shall be possible to invoke
     Op with an argument corresponding to parameter P that is of declared type T'—The Principle
     of (Variable) Substitutability.

 20. A union type is a type T such that there exists no value that is of type T and not of some
     immediate subtype of T (i.e., there is no value v such that MST(v) is T). A dummy type is a
     union type that has no declared possible representation (and hence no selector); a given union
     type shall be permitted to be a dummy type if and only if it is empty or it has no regular
     immediate supertype (where a regular type is a type that is not a dummy type). Moreover:

     a.   Conceptually, there is a special scalar dummy type, alpha, that contains all scalar values.
          Type alpha is the maximal type with respect to every scalar type; by definition, it has
          no declared possible representation and no immediate supertypes.

     b.   Conceptually, there is a special scalar dummy type, omega, that contains no values at all.
          Type omega is the minimal type with respect to every scalar type; by definition, it has
          no declared possible representation and no immediate subtypes.

 21. Let types T and T' be both tuple types or both relation types, with headings
     { <A1,T1>,      <A2,T2>,      ..., <An,Tn>        }

     { <A1,T1'>, <A2,T2'>, ..., <An,Tn'> }

     respectively. Then type T' is a subtype of type T (equivalently, type T is a supertype of type
     T') if and only if, for all i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), type Ti' is a subtype of type Ti (equivalently, type Ti
     is a supertype of type Ti').

 22. Let H be a heading defined as follows:
     { <A1,T1>, <A2,T2>, ..., <An,Tn> }

     Then:

     a.   t is a tuple that conforms to heading H if and only if t is of the form
     { <A1,T1',v1>, <A2,T2',v2>, ..., <An,Tn',vn> }

          where, for all i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), type Ti' is a subtype of type Ti and vi is a value of type Ti'.

     b.   r is a relation that conforms to heading H if and only if r consists of a heading and a
          body, where:

          ●    The heading of r is of the form
               { <A1,T1'>, <A2,T2'>, ..., <An,Tn'> }




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                               279
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                   Chapter 13 / The Inheritance Model


              where, for all i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), type Ti' is a subtype of type Ti.

          ●   The body of r is a set of tuples, all of which conform to the heading of r.

 23. Let types T, T_alpha, and T_omega be all tuple types or all relation types, with headings
     { <A1,T1>,             <A2,T2>,             ..., <An,Tn>              }

     { <A1,T1_alpha>, <A2,T2_alpha>, ..., <An,Tn_alpha> }

     { <A1,T1_omega>, <A2,T2_omega>, ..., <An,Tn_omega> }

     respectively. Then types T_alpha and T_omega are the maximal type with respect to type
     T and the minimal type with respect to type T, respectively, if and only if, for all i (i = 1, 2,
     ..., n), type Ti_alpha is the maximal type with respect to type Ti and type Ti_omega is the
     minimal type with respect to type Ti.

 24. Let H be a heading defined as follows:
     { <A1,T1>, <A2,T2>, ..., <An,Tn> }

     Then:

     a.   If t is a tuple that conforms to H—meaning t is of the form
          { <A1,T1',v1>, <A2,T2',v2>, ..., <An,Tn',vn> }

          where, for all i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), type Ti' is a subtype of type Ti and vi is a value of type
          Ti'—then the most specific type of t is
          TUPLE { <A1,MST1>, <A2,MST2>, ..., <An,MSTn> }

          where, for all i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), type MSTi is the most specific type of value vi.

     b.   If r is a relation that conforms to H—meaning the body of r is a set of tuples, each of
          which has as its most specific type a type that is a subtype of the type TUPLE H, and
          meaning further that each such tuple can be regarded without loss of generality as being
          of the form
          { <A1,T1',v1>, <A2,T2',v2>, ..., <An,Tn',vn> }

          where, for all i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), type Ti' is a subtype of type Ti and is the most specific
          type of value vi (note that distinct tuples in the body of r will be of distinct most specific
          types, in general; thus, type Ti' varies over the tuples in the body of r)—then the most
          specific type of r is
          RELATION { <A1,MST1>, <A2,MST2>, ..., <An,MSTn> }

          where, for all i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), type MSTi is the most specific common supertype of those




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                 280
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                                 Chapter 13 / The Inheritance Model


          most specific types Ti', taken over all tuples in the body of r.

 25. Let tuple or relation variable V be of declared type T, and let the heading of T have attributes
     A1, A2, ..., An. Then we can model V as a named set of named ordered triples of the form
     <DTi,MSTi,vi>, where:

     a.    The name of the set is the name of the variable (V in the example).

     b.    The name of each triple is the name of the corresponding attribute.

     c.   DTi is the name of the declared type of attribute Ai.

     d.   MSTi is the name of the most specific type—also known as the current most specific
          type—for, or of, attribute Ai. (If V is a relation variable, then the most specific type of Ai
          is the most specific common supertype of the most specific types of the m values in vi—
          see the explanation of vi below.)

     e.   If V is a tuple variable, vi is a value of most specific type MSTi—the current value for,
          or of, attribute Ai. If V is a relation variable, then let the body of the current value of V
          consist of m tuples; label those tuples (in some arbitrary sequence) “tuple 1,” “tuple 2,”
          ..., “tuple m”; then vi is a sequence of m values (not necessarily all distinct), being the Ai
          values from tuple 1, tuple 2, ..., tuple m (in that order); note that all of those values are of
          type MSTi.

     We use the notation DT(Ai), MST(Ai), v(Ai) to refer to the DTi, MSTi, vi components,
     respectively, of attribute Ai of this model of tuple or relation variable V. We also use the
     notation DT(V), MST(V), v(V) to refer to the overall declared type, overall current most
     specific type, and overall current value, respectively, of this model of tuple or relation
     variable V.
          Now let X be a tuple or relation expression. By definition, X specifies an invocation of
     some tuple or relation operator Op (where the arguments, if any, to that invocation of Op are
     specified as expressions in turn). Thus, the notation DTi(V), MSTi(V), vi(V) just introduced
     can be extended in an obvious way to refer to the declared type DTi(X), the current most
     specific type MSTi(X), and the current value vi(X), respectively, of the DTi, MSTi, vi
     components, respectively, of attribute Ai of tuple or relation expression X—where DTi(X) is
     known at compile time, and MSTi(X) and vi(X) refer to the result of evaluating X and are
     therefore not known until run time (in general).


RECENT INHERITANCE MODEL CHANGES

There are a few differences between the inheritance model as defined in the present chapter and the
version documented in this book’s predecessor (reference [83]). For the benefit of readers who
might be familiar with that earlier version, we summarize the main differences here.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           281
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                             Chapter 13 / The Inheritance Model


 ■   The root and leaf type concepts are no longer regarded as absolutes but are instead defined
     relative to some given set of types (which can be thought of, informally, as a type hierarchy or
     type graph). This change primarily affects IM Prescriptions 6 and 7.

 ■   The wording of several prescriptions has been changed to cover (a) both single and multiple
     inheritance and (b) both scalar and tuple/relation types. These changes—which are not
     intended to affect the model as such—apply primarily to IM Prescriptions 7 and 8.

 ■   In IM Prescription 12, the requirement that DT(X) and DT(Y) shall have a common supertype
     has been replaced by the stronger requirement that DT(X) and DT(Y) shall have a nonempty
     common subtype. (The fact that the new requirement is stronger than the old one might not
     be obvious but is proved in Chapter 15.)

 ■   Analogously, in IM Prescription 13, the requirement that DTx(A) and DTy(A) shall have a
     common supertype has been replaced by the stronger requirement that DTx(A) and DTy(A)
     shall have a nonempty common subtype.

 ■   In IM Prescription 14, TREAT DOWN has been renamed TREAT AS, referred to more
     usually as just TREAT.

 ■   IM Prescriptions 14 and 15 have been generalized slightly (previously we required T to be a
     subtype of DT(X); now we require only that they have a nonempty common subtype).

 ■   IM Prescription 17 has been amplified to make the rules regarding specification signatures
     more explicit.

 ■   IM Prescription 20 has been corrected slightly (previously it required a dummy type to have
     no regular immediate supertypes, but this rule overlooked the possibility that a dummy type
     might be empty).

    In addition to all of the foregoing, almost all of the prescriptions have been reworded
 somewhat. However, those revisions in themselves are not intended to induce any changes in
 what is being described.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       282