                                                     Chapter 14

                 Single Inheritance with Scalar Types

In this chapter, we elaborate on the first 20 of our IM Prescriptions, using the type hierarchy of Fig.
12.1 as a basis for most examples. We remind you that until further notice we take the unqualified
terms type, subtype, and supertype to mean scalar types, subtypes, and supertypes specifically and
the unqualified terms value, variable, (read-only) operator, expression, and result to mean scalar
values, variables, operators, expressions, and results specifically.1 In addition, we take the
unqualified term inheritance to mean single inheritance specifically and the unqualified term
constraint to mean a type constraint specifically. We assume that all of the types under
consideration are members of some given set of types S (and all references to root or leaf types are
to be understood in the context of that set S). Finally, we use the symbols T and T' to refer
generically to a pair of types such that T' is a subtype of T—equivalently, such that T is a supertype
of T'. As noted in Chapter 13, you might find it helpful to think of T and T' as ELLIPSE and
CIRCLE, respectively, except where otherwise indicated.


IM PRESCRIPTION 1: TYPES ARE SETS

T and T' shall indeed both be types; i.e., each shall be a named set of values.

                                                 ———  —

IM Prescription 1 simply asserts that supertypes and subtypes are indeed types, in the full sense of
that term as required by The Third Manifesto. One consequence is that subtypes can have lower-
level subtypes of their own (and supertypes can have higher-level supertypes of their own), as we
already know.


IM PRESCRIPTION 2: SUBTYPES ARE SUBSETS

Every value in T' shall be a value in T; i.e., the set of values constituting T' shall be a subset of the
set of values constituting T (in other words, if a value is of type T', it shall also be of type T).
Moreover, if T and T' are distinct (see IM Prescriptions 3 and 4), then there shall exist at least one
value of type T that is not of type T'.

                                             ———  ———


1
  To repeat from Chapter 12, however, formal statements—the IM Prescriptions themselves in particular—are
deliberately worded in such a way as to allow, e.g., the term value to be taken to mean a scalar value or a tuple value or
a relation value as the context demands. They are also deliberately worded in such a way as to apply to multiple
inheritance as well as single, barring explicit statements to the contrary.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           283
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                  Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


In general, to say that value v is of type T does not preclude the possibility that v is also of type T'.
For example, to say that e is an ellipse does not preclude the possibility that e is also a circle. In
fact, to say that v is of type T means, precisely, that the most specific type of v (see IM Prescription
8) is some subtype of T (see IM Prescriptions 3-5). It follows that if v is of type T', the operators
that apply to v include (by definition) all of the operators that apply to values of type T', and those
operators include (by definition) all of the operators that apply to values of type T. For example, if
AREA is an operator that applies to values of type ELLIPSE, then AREA is also an operator that
applies to values of type CIRCLE. In other words (loosely): Operators associated with type T
are inherited by type T'.
       Here in outline are some of the operators that (we will assume) apply to values of type
ELLIPSE and hence to values of type CIRCLE also. Note: As we will see later, some of these
operators might need to be reimplemented for type CIRCLE, implying that two implementation
versions of the operator in question, an ELLIPSE version and a CIRCLE version, might exist under
the covers (as it were). See IM Prescription 9 for further discussion.
      OPERATOR THE_A ( E ELLIPSE ) RETURNS LENGTH ;
          /* “the a semiaxis of” */ ... ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      OPERATOR THE_B ( E ELLIPSE ) RETURNS LENGTH ;
          /* “the b semiaxis of” */ ... ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      OPERATOR THE_CTR ( E ELLIPSE ) RETURNS POINT ;
          /* “the center of” */ ... ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      OPERATOR AREA ( E ELLIPSE ) RETURNS AREA ;
          /* “area of”; note that AREA is both the name of the */
          /* operator and the name of the type of the result    */
          /* (meaning it is probably the name of the            */
          /* corresponding selector too); such punning might or */
          /* might not be valid in a real D (?)                 */
          ... ;
      END OPERATOR ;

And here is an operator that applies to values of type CIRCLE but not to values of type ELLIPSE:
      OPERATOR THE_R ( C CIRCLE ) RETURNS LENGTH ;
          /* “the radius of” */ ... ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      Of course, the operators THE_A, THE_B, and THE_CTR (for type ELLIPSE) and THE_R
and THE_CTR (for type CIRCLE) are in fact required by RM Prescription 5, and they are provided
“automatically.” (As we saw in Chapter 3, “automatically” here might or might not mean
automated, in the sense that the implementation is provided by the system.) In the case of
THE_CTR for type CIRCLE in particular, it is precisely inheritance from type ELLIPSE that serves
as the required “automatic” provision of that operator (though, to repeat, it is possible that the
operator might need to be reimplemented for type CIRCLE). As for THE_A and THE_B for type
CIRCLE, these operators are required, not by RM Prescription 5, but rather by the very notion of




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          284
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                   Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


inheritance (though once again it is possible that they might need to be reimplemented for type
CIRCLE).
        It follows from all of the above that if v is of type T', then v must satisfy all of the constraints
that apply to values of type T (as well as all of the constraints that apply to values of type T'
specifically). To repeat an example from Chapter 12, if c is a circle (and hence an ellipse), and if
ellipses are subject to the constraint that the length of their major semiaxis a must be greater than or
equal to that of their minor semiaxis b, then that same constraint must be satisfied by c—as indeed it
is, trivially, because in the case of a circle the semiaxes a and b coincide in the radius r. In other
words (loosely): Constraints associated with type T are inherited by type T'.
        Now, in Chapter 3 we said that if v is a scalar value, it can be thought of as carrying around
with it a kind of flag that announces “I am an integer” or “I am a supplier number” or “I am a
geometric point” (and so on). Now we see that, conceptually speaking, it might have to carry
around several distinct flags—e.g., “I am an ellipse” and “I am a circle.” (Of course, a flag that
announces just the most specific type is all that is logically required. See IM Prescription 8.)
        We also said in Chapter 6 that distinct types are disjoint “except possibly if type inheritance is
supported.” Now we see that two types are definitely not disjoint if one is a subtype of the other.
We will encounter some further cases of nondisjointness in Chapters 15 and 16.
        We now observe that our informal characterization of IM Prescription 2 (“subtypes are
subsets”) can more accurately be stated as follows: Proper subtypes are proper subsets (see IM
Prescription 4). This stronger characterization follows from the requirement that if T and T' are
distinct, then there must exist at least one value of type T that is not of type T'—a requirement we
now proceed to justify. Suppose it were not satisfied; i.e., suppose every value of type T were in
fact a value of type T'. Then:

 ■    Any operator that applied to values of type T' would apply to all values of type T.

 ■    Any constraint that applied to values of type T' would apply to all values of type T.

In other words, T' and T would effectively be identical except for their names, and there would be
no logical reason to distinguish between them.
      Incidentally, it follows immediately from the foregoing that the most specific type of a given
value is not necessarily a leaf type. It also follows that type hierarchies cannot contain any
cycles (i.e., they are indeed hierarchies). For suppose, contrariwise, that there existed some
sequence of types T1, T2, T3, ..., Tn such that T1 was an immediate supertype of T2, T2 was an
immediate supertype of T3, ..., and Tn was an immediate supertype of T1. Then every one of these
types T1, T2, T3, ..., Tn would be a proper supertype, and hence a proper superset, of itself!
      One last point: It is an obvious corollary of IM Prescription 2 that there cannot be more
values of type T' than there are of type T. This apparently trivial observation can be very helpful in
pinpointing errors and clearing up confusions. For example, it would be an error according to our
model to define COLORED_CIRCLE as a subtype of type CIRCLE (a state of affairs that might
come as a surprise, if you are familiar with object systems). Assuming circles were originally seen
as “plain” or uncolored, then there are clearly more colored circles than there are just plain circles.
Moreover, there is clearly no CIRCLE selector invocation that could possibly yield a value of type
COLORED_CIRCLE. (We are assuming here that, e.g., a red circle and a blue circle of the same
size and at the same location are different colored circles.) And so the proposed supertype/subtype




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            285
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


relationship, as such, does not in fact exist. Note: We will have quite a lot more to say regarding
this particular example in Appendix G.


IM PRESCRIPTION 3: “SUBTYPE OF” IS REFLEXIVE

T and T' shall not necessarily be distinct; i.e., every type shall be both a subtype and a supertype of
itself.

                                      ———  ———

This prescription and the next five all have to do with matters of terminology (they elaborate on
certain of the terms and concepts introduced in the section “The Running Example” in Chapter 12).
The current prescription in particular recognizes that it is convenient to regard any given type T as
both a subtype and a supertype of itself. This convention has the effect of simplifying the
formulation of many of the prescriptions that we will be discussing later. Thus, for example,
“ELLIPSE is a subtype of ELLIPSE” is a true statement, and so is “ELLIPSE is a supertype of
ELLIPSE.”
      Note: To say that a given dyadic logical operator Op is reflexive merely means that x Op x
evaluates to TRUE for all x. Thus, e.g., “=” is reflexive, and so is “is a subtype of.” By contrast,
“<” and “>” are not.


IM PRESCRIPTION 4: PROPER SUBTYPES

If and only if types T and T' are distinct, T' shall be a proper subtype of T, and T shall be a proper
supertype of T'.

                                      ———  ———

This prescription introduces some terminology for talking about subtypes and supertypes when the
types in question are distinct. In terms of our running example, we can say that, e.g., CIRCLE is a
proper subtype of ELLIPSE. (By virtue of IM Prescription 5, q.v., it is also a proper subtype of
PLANE_FIGURE.) It is also a subtype of CIRCLE, but not a proper one. Likewise,
PLANE_FIGURE is a proper supertype of both ELLIPSE and CIRCLE; it is also a supertype of
PLANE_FIGURE, but not a proper one.
       We remind you from Chapter 12 that if T' is a proper subtype of T, there is no requirement
that (a) physical representations of appearances of values of type T', and (b) physical representations
of appearances of values of type T, be of the same form. Of course, there is no requirement that
they be different, either.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         286
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                  Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


IM PRESCRIPTION 5: “SUBTYPE OF” IS TRANSITIVE

Every subtype of T' shall be a subtype of T. Every supertype of T shall be a supertype of T'.

                                       ———  ———

This prescription simply says that a subtype of a subtype is a subtype and a supertype of a supertype
is a supertype. Thus, for example, RECTANGLE is a subtype of PLANE_FIGURE, and
PLANE_FIGURE is a supertype of RECTANGLE.
       Note: To say that a given dyadic logical operator Op is transitive merely means that, for all
x, y, and z, if x Op y and y Op z both evaluate to TRUE, then so does x Op z. Thus, e.g., “=” is
transitive, and so is “is a subtype of.” By contrast, “≠” and “is disjoint from” are not.


IM PRESCRIPTION 6: IMMEDIATE SUBTYPES

If and only if T' is a proper subtype of T and there is no type that is both a proper supertype of T'
and a proper subtype of T, then T' shall be an immediate subtype of T, and T shall be an immediate
supertype of T'. A type that is not an immediate subtype of any type shall be a root type. A type that
is not an immediate supertype of any type shall be a leaf type.

                                       ———  ———

In terms of our running example, this prescription says that, e.g., CIRCLE is an immediate subtype
of ELLIPSE, and ELLIPSE is an immediate supertype of CIRCLE. CIRCLE is also a subtype of
PLANE_FIGURE, but not an immediate one; equivalently, PLANE_FIGURE is a supertype of
CIRCLE, but not an immediate one. PLANE_FIGURE is a root type. CIRCLE and SQUARE are
leaf types.


IM PRESCRIPTION 7: ROOT TYPES DISJOINT

If T1 and T2 are distinct root types, then they shall be disjoint; i.e., no value shall be of both type
T1 and type T2.

                                       ———  ———

This prescription is in fact a logical consequence of IM Prescription 8. We state it explicitly for
emphasis but defer detailed discussion to the next section.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           287
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                            Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


IM PRESCRIPTION 8: SCALAR VALUES WITH INHERITANCE

Every set of types T1, T2, ..., Tn shall have a common subtype T' such that a given value is of each
of the types T1, T2, ..., Tn if and only if it is of type T'.

                                              ———  ———

The definition of scalar value needs some extension if type inheritance is supported—basically
because such a value can now be of more than one type. The present prescription addresses this
issue, but in a rather roundabout way, as we now show.
       First of all, we need to introduce the special scalar type omega. Type omega is empty,
meaning it contains no values at all (no scalar values in particular). We will have more to say about
omega under IM Prescription 20; for now, it is sufficient to observe that such a type does exist, at
least conceptually, and it can be regarded as being a subtype of every scalar type1 (since the empty
set is a subset of every set).
       Observe next that the prescription refers to a common subtype T' of a set of n types T1, T2, ...,
Tn. Consider the case n = 2, meaning we are dealing with precisely two types T1 and T2; moreover,
we can assume that T1 and T2 are distinct (for otherwise we are dealing with the case n = 1). Now,
if T1 and T2 have omega as their only common subtype, they are certainly disjoint; in fact, the only
way T1 and T2 can have a nonempty common subtype—under our assumption of single
inheritance—is if one is a (necessarily proper) subtype of the other. Assume without loss of
generality that T2 is a proper subtype of T1. Then the requirements of IM Prescription 8 are
satisfied with T' = T2.
       It should be clear without going into detail that the foregoing argument can be extended to the
case of arbitrary n > 2. So what about the remaining possibilities, n = 1 and n = 0? For n = 1, the
requirements of IM Prescription 8 are satisfied trivially with T' = T1. For n = 0, they are satisfied
even more trivially, as it were, since in this case there simply is no value that is “of each of the types
T1, T2, ..., Tn,” and the requirements of IM Prescription 8 are satisfied trivially with T' = omega.
       By the way, note carefully that we have said that type omega exists “at least conceptually.”
What this means is that we do not require or expect it to be explicitly defined; indeed, we believe it
would usually not be. (Note that if it is, it will necessarily be the only leaf type.) In what follows,
we will assume it is not explicitly defined, barring explicit statements to the contrary.
       An immediate logical consequence of IM Prescription 8 is the disjointness assumption
(already discussed in Chapter 12 but repeated for convenience here):

    ■   If types T1 and T2 are such that neither is a subtype of the other, then they are disjoint—i.e.,
        no value is of both type T1 and type T2.




1
  It follows that we are moving here into the realm of multiple inheritance, albeit in a very limited kind of way.
Nevertheless, we continue to assume throughout most of this chapter that it makes sense to talk in terms of single
inheritance only. Note in particular that the fact that omega is a subtype of every scalar type does not in itself violate
the disjointness assumption (!).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                             288
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                             Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


      To repeat from Chapter 12, this assumption is valid as long as we limit our attention to single
inheritance only.1 And it has a number of important implications, the following among them:

    ■    Distinct root types are disjoint (IM Prescription 7).

    ■    Distinct type hierarchies are disjoint. That is, if TH1 and TH2 are type hierarchies with
         distinct root types RT1 and RT2, respectively, and if types T1 and T2 belong to TH1 and TH2,
         respectively, then T1 and T2 are disjoint. For example, if we deleted type PLANE_FIGURE
         (only) from Fig. 12.1, we would be left with two type hierarchies, one rooted at type
         ELLIPSE and one at type POLYGON, that are necessarily disjoint (there is no value that is
         both an ellipse and a polygon).

    ■    Distinct immediate subtypes of the same supertype are disjoint.

    ■    Distinct leaf types are disjoint.

    ■    Every value has exactly one most specific type (and this is the real point of IM Prescription
         8, in the context of single inheritance). For example, a given value might have types
         PLANE_FIGURE, POLYGON, and RECTANGLE, but not SQUARE, in which case the
         most specific type would be, precisely, RECTANGLE. In fact, as noted in Chapter 12, if
         value v is of most specific type T, then the set of types possessed by v is, precisely, the set
         consisting of all supertypes of T (a set that includes T itself, of course). In other words, v is of
         every type that is a supertype of T and is of no other type.


IM PRESCRIPTION 9: SCALAR VARIABLES WITH INHERITANCE

Let scalar variable V be of declared type T. Because of value substitutability (see IM Prescription
16), the value v assigned to V at any given time can have any subtype T' of type T as its most
specific type. We can therefore model V as a named ordered triple of the form <DT,MST,v>,
where:
    a.     The name of the triple is the name of the variable, V.
    b.     DT is the name of the declared type for variable V.
    c.     MST is the name of the most specific type—also known as the current most specific type—
           for, or of, variable V.
    d.     v is a value of most specific type MST—the current value for, or of, variable V.
We use the notation DT(V), MST(V), v(V) to refer to the DT, MST, v components, respectively, of
this model of scalar variable V.
      Now let X be a scalar expression. By definition, X specifies an invocation of some scalar
operator Op (where the arguments, if any, to that invocation of Op are specified as expressions in
turn). Thus, the notation DT(V), MST(V), v(V) just introduced can be extended in an obvious way

1
    It is also valid if we depart from single inheritance only in that we explicitly define type omega.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                 289
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                  Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


to refer to the declared type DT(X), the current most specific type MST(X), and the current value
v(X), respectively, of X—where DT(X) is DT(Op) and is known at compile time, and MST(X) and
v(X) refer to the result of evaluating X and are therefore not known until run time (in general).
                                       ———  ———

Like the definition of scalar value, the definition of scalar variable also needs some extension if
type inheritance is supported—basically because such a variable is permitted to have a value that is
of any subtype of the declared type of the variable in question. For example, let scalar variable E be
defined as follows:
      VAR E ELLIPSE ;

       At run time, then, the current value of variable E can have any subtype of ELLIPSE
(including ELLIPSE itself in particular) as its most specific type. Thus, the current value might be a
circle instead of “just an ellipse” (such a possibility is intuitively reasonable, of course, since a
circle is an ellipse). If it is, then we can say that:

 ■     DT(E) is ELLIPSE.

 ■     MST(E) is CIRCLE.

 ■     v(E) is whatever circle happens to be the current value of E.

        Observe, therefore, that (as noted in Chapter 12) we must now be careful over the logical
difference between the two important types that apply to any given variable: the declared type,
which does not change over time, vs. the current most specific type, which does (in general). Of
course, the second of these must always be some subtype—not necessarily a proper subtype—of the
first; nevertheless, there is a logical difference between the two concepts.
        Observe further that if type T is the current most specific type of variable V, then every proper
supertype of type T is also a “current type” of variable V, in a sense. However, the term “current
type” is usually used, informally, to refer to the most specific current type of the variable in
question.
        Note: By virtue of IM Prescription 8, MST(V) is in fact implied by v(V), and is thus logically
unnecessary as a component of the model of V. We include it for reasons of convenience and
explicitness. Also, by virtue of RM Prescription 11, DT(V) can never be omega. (Nor can MST(V),
of course, since there is no value of type omega.)
        Now, it should be clear that—as IM Prescription 9 in fact states—the foregoing definitions
can readily be extended to apply to arbitrary scalar expressions instead of just to scalar variables
specifically. Let X be such an expression, and let v(X) be the result of evaluating that expression.
Then:

 ■    X has a declared type, DT(X): namely, the declared type of the operator Op that is invoked at
      the outermost level of X. DT(X) is known at compile time; in fact, it is determined by the
      specification signature for Op, as we will see under IM Prescription 17. Note in particular
      that Op might be a selector.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          290
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                  Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


 ■    X also has a current most specific type, MST(X): namely, the type that is the most specific type
      of v(X). MST(X) is not known until run time, in general.

       We have now laid sufficient groundwork to be able to discuss an important concept that
pervades the topic of type inheritance: polymorphism. (Of course, we have met this concept
before, in Chapter 3 in particular, but there is a lot more to be said about it in the present context.)
As we have seen, if T' is a subtype of T, then all operators that apply to values of type T apply to
values of type T' as well. Thus (to repeat a by now familiar example), if AREA(e) is valid, where e
is an ellipse, then AREA(c), where c is a circle, must be valid as well. It follows that the AREA
operator is polymorphic: It can take arguments of different types on different invocations.
       Recall now that ellipses and circles, at least as we defined them in Chapter 12, have different
possreps:
      TYPE ELLIPSE ... POSSREP { A ..., B ..., CTR ... } ;

      TYPE CIRCLE      ... POSSREP { R ..., CTR ... } ... ;

      It is conceivable, therefore, that two different versions of the AREA operator will exist under
the covers, one that makes use of the ELLIPSE possrep and one that makes use of the CIRCLE
possrep. To say it again, it is conceivable—but it is not absolutely necessary. So long as the code
that implements AREA for type ELLIPSE is written in terms of the ELLIPSE possrep, that code
will necessarily work for circles, because the ELLIPSE possrep is necessarily, albeit implicitly, a
possrep for CIRCLE too (though, as explained in Chapter 12, not a declared one). To be more
specific, the area of a general ellipse is ab, while that of a circle is r². Thus, the code that
implements the ellipse version of AREA will presumably invoke THE_A and THE_B, and that
code will certainly work for a circle.
      Note further that the implementer might want to provide distinct versions of some operator at
the supertype and subtype levels anyway, even when there is no logical need to do so. Consider
polygons and rectangles, for example. The algorithm that computes the area of a general polygon
will certainly work for a rectangle; for rectangles, however, a much more efficient algorithm—
multiply the height by the width—is available. Thus, it might be desirable to have two
implementation versions of the operator for reasons of efficiency, if for no other reason.
      To return to ellipses and circles: Observe now, however, that the ellipse AREA code will
definitely not work for circles if it is written in terms of a physical representation instead of a
possible one, and physical representations for types ELLIPSE and CIRCLE differ. The practice of
implementing operators in terms of physical representations is thus clearly contraindicated. Code
defensively! In fact, we would strongly recommend the following discipline: Access to physical
representations should be limited to the following operators and nothing else:

 ■     Selector operators

 ■     THE_ operators

 ■     IS_T operators (see IM Prescription 15)




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         291
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                         Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


We remind you that many of these operators (perhaps not all) will have system-provided
implementations anyway.
       Of course, it makes no logical difference to the user how many implementation versions of
AREA exist under the covers; to the user there is just one AREA operator, which works for (say)
ellipses and therefore works for circles too, by definition. To say it again, AREA is polymorphic.
       Now, we have already seen many examples of polymorphic operators in earlier chapters: “=”,
“:=”, “+”, “||”, SUM, and many others. But there is no inheritance, as such, involved in these
examples—they are all instances of overloading polymorphism (also known as general
polymorphism [137], ad hoc polymorphism [15], or just overloading for short). The kind of
polymorphism exhibited by the AREA operator, by contrast, is known as inclusion polymorphism
[15], on the grounds that the relationship between (e.g.) circles and ellipses is basically that of set
inclusion.1 For obvious reasons, we take the unqualified term polymorphism throughout this part of
the book to mean inclusion polymorphism specifically, barring explicit statements to the contrary.
       Now, a helpful way to characterize the logical difference between inclusion and overloading
polymorphism is as follows:

    ■   Inclusion polymorphism means there is just one operator, with several distinct
        implementation versions under the covers (but the user does not need to know that the
        versions in question are in fact distinct—to the user, to repeat, there is just one operator).

    ■   Overloading polymorphism, by contrast, means there are several distinct operators with the
        same name (and the user does need to know that the operators in question are in fact distinct,
        with distinct—though preferably similar—semantics). Note: “Preferably similar” might be
        too strong here. For example, we use THE_A in this chapter to refer to an ellipse semiaxis,
        but in the next chapter we will use it to refer to a parallelogram vertex—so THE_A is
        definitely overloaded, and its meanings are quite different.

       These matters are explained more fully later under IM Prescriptions 16-19, but we elaborate
on them slightly here for purposes of reference (despite the fact that such elaboration might not
make very much sense at this juncture). Briefly, for overloading polymorphism, each of the distinct
operators will have its own distinct specification signature (because invocations of the operators in
question would otherwise be ambiguous). For inclusion polymorphism, by contrast, the single
operator will have just one specification signature, but each distinct under-the-covers
implementation version of that operator will have its own distinct version signature. See IM
Prescription 17 for further discussion.
       The trouble is, as that further discussion will show, there can be no guarantee with inclusion
polymorphism that the various versions under the covers do in fact all implement the same
operator!—i.e., distinct versions might have distinct semantics. If they do, of course, we do not
have true inclusion polymorphism any more, we have overloading polymorphism instead, and such
a state of affairs is in violation of our model. But you should be aware that such violations are
certainly possible in practice, and are even argued by some to be desirable. What is more, the
situation is confused still further by the fact that, regrettably, much of the literature uses the term

1
  The operators “=”, “:=”, “+”, and so forth might become instances of inclusion polymorphism if inheritance is
supported. For example, “=” might be inherited from type alpha (see IM Prescription 20).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       292
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                          Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


overloading to mean inclusion polymorphism anyway. Again, see IM Prescription 17 for further
discussion.
       Back to inclusion polymorphism specifically. What are the implications of this idea for the
user? Consider the following example. Suppose we need to write a program to display some
diagram, made up of squares, circles, ellipses, etc. Without polymorphism, the code for this task
will look something like this:
       FOR EACH x  DIAGRAM
           CASE ;
              WHEN IS_SQUARE ( x ) THEN CALL DISPLAY_SQUARE ... ;
              WHEN IS_CIRCLE ( x ) THEN CALL DISPLAY_CIRCLE ... ;
              .....
           END CASE ;

(See IM Prescription 15 for an explanation of the operators IS_SQUARE, IS_CIRCLE, etc.) With
polymorphism, by contrast, the code is much simpler and much more succinct:
       FOR EACH x  DIAGRAM CALL DISPLAY ( x ) ;

Explanation: DISPLAY here is a polymorphic operator. The version of DISPLAY that works for
values of a given type will be defined (if necessary) when that type is defined—or possibly at some
subsequent time—and will be made known to the system at that time. At run time, then, when the
system encounters the DISPLAY invocation with argument x, it will determine the version of
DISPLAY that is appropriate to the type of x and invoke that version: a process known as run-time
binding (because the invocation in question is being “bound” to the appropriate implementation
code at run time).1 In other words, polymorphism effectively means that certain CASE expressions
and CASE statements that would otherwise have had to appear in the user’s source code are moved
under the covers—the system performs those CASE operations in the user’s behalf.
       Note the implications of the foregoing for program maintenance in particular. For example,
suppose that (a) a new type TRIANGLE is defined (another immediate subtype of POLYGON) and
(b) a corresponding new version of DISPLAY is defined as well. Without polymorphism, we
would have to examine every source-code CASE expression and CASE statement of the form
shown previously to see whether it needs to be modified to include the following:
       WHEN IS_TRIANGLE ( x ) THEN CALL DISPLAY_TRIANGLE ... ;

With polymorphism, however, no such modifications are needed at all.
      Because of examples like the foregoing, polymorphism is sometimes described, a little
colorfully, as “old code invoking new code”; that is, a program P can effectively invoke some


1
  Two points. First, we will show under IM Prescription 17 that the system might in fact be able to do part or all of the
binding at compile time instead of run time (an obvious performance benefit). Second, even if some run-time binding is
required, it still might not involve as much overhead as you might think. As you probably noticed, we explained the
run-time binding process in the example in terms of “the” type of x; well, we were being deliberately (and, we hope,
uncharacteristically) vague here. Suppose types T1, T2, T3, T4, and T5 are such that T1, T2, T3, and T4 are immediate
supertypes of T2, T3, T4, and T5, respectively; suppose operator Op has implementation versions for types T1 and T3
(only); finally, suppose the most specific type of x is T5. Then there is no need for the system to determine this latter
fact; all it needs to do is ascertain that x is certainly of type T3 and therefore invoke the T3 version of Op.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                         293
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


version of an operator Op that did not even exist (the version, that is) at the time P was written.
Thus, we have, at least potentially, what is called code reuse: The very same program P might be
usable on data that is of a type that had not even been defined at the time P was written. (Certainly
the code of program P is being reused here. The code that implements operator Op under the covers
might or might not be; for example, the code that implements the AREA operator for ellipses might
or might not be reusable for circles, as we saw earlier.)
      We now consider another example in order to make another point. Specifically, we consider
the operators THE_A (“the a semiaxis of”) and THE_R (“the radius of”). Assume first that ellipses
and circles have the same physical representation and THE_A for type ELLIPSE is implemented in
terms of that physical representation. Then that same implementation code can serve as the
implementation of THE_A for type CIRCLE too, and THE_R can be implemented thus:
      OPERATOR THE_R ( C CIRCLE ) RETURNS LENGTH ... ;
         RETURN ( THE_A ( C ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

Of course, it could also be implemented directly in terms of the physical representation if desired.
      Now assume instead that ellipses and circles have different physical representations, but
THE_A for type ELLIPSE is still implemented in terms of the ELLIPSE physical representation.
Then THE_R might be implemented in terms of the CIRCLE physical representation, and THE_A
for type CIRCLE could then be implemented thus:
      OPERATOR THE_A ( C CIRCLE ) RETURNS LENGTH ... ;
         RETURN ( THE_R ( C ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

Of course, it could also be implemented directly in terms of the CIRCLE physical representation if
desired.
      The net of the foregoing example is just this: For type CIRCLE, either of THE_A or THE_R
might be implemented in terms of the other, depending on circumstances (physical representations
in particular). Either way, of course, it should make no logical difference so far as the user is
concerned.
      Recall now the concept of substitutability, which we said in Chapter 12 was “in many ways
the whole point of inheritance.” Just to remind you, substitutability means that, e.g., wherever the
system expects a value of type ELLIPSE, we can always substitute a value of type CIRCLE,
because circles are ellipses. In particular:

 ■    If some relation r has an attribute A of declared type ELLIPSE, some of the A values in r
      might in fact be circles rather than “just ellipses.”

 ■    If type T has a possrep with a component X of declared type ELLIPSE, then for some values v
      of type T the operator invocation THE_X(v) might return a circle instead of “just an ellipse.”

      More generally, wherever the system expects a value of type T, we can always substitute a
value of type T'—The Principle of (Value) Substitutability (see IM Prescription 16). But it should
be clear from our earlier discussions that substitutability is really just inclusion polymorphism in a




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         294
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                  Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


different guise; we mention it here principally because it is widely recognized as the sine qua non of
type inheritance, and no discussion of that topic would be complete without such a mention.
      We close this section by pointing out that the notions of polymorphism and substitutability,
important though they might be in practice, are both logically implied by the notion of type
inheritance—they are not, logically speaking, completely separate concepts. In other words, if the
system supports type inheritance, it must support polymorphism and substitutability as well (for if it
did not, then it would not be supporting type inheritance, by definition).


IM PRESCRIPTION 10: SPECIALIZATION BY CONSTRAINT

Let T be a regular proper supertype (see IM Prescription 20), and let T' be an immediate subtype of
T. Then the definition of T' shall specify a specialization constraint SC, formulated in terms of T,
such that a value shall be of type T' if and only if it is of type T and it satisfies constraint SC. There
shall exist at least one value of type T that does not satisfy constraint SC.

                                       ———  ———

Controversy has raged for years in the literature (especially the object literature) over the question
of whether the system should be aware of the fact that, e.g., an ellipse whose semiaxes a and b are
equal is really a circle. Clearly, if it is so aware, then updating a variable of declared type ELLIPSE
could have the effect of changing the most specific type of that variable “down” from ELLIPSE to
CIRCLE. We refer to such an effect as specialization by constraint, or S by C for short (though
we should warn you that other writers use an almost identical term to mean something rather
different, as we will see in Appendix F).
       At first sight, it would seem obvious that a good model of inheritance must include S by C;
“the more knowledge the system has, the better” is always a good general principle. After all, an
ellipse with equal semiaxes certainly is a circle in the real world, and a model that does not
understand this fact can hardly be said to be a good model of reality. However, we did not include
S by C in the first version of our model [82]. Our reasons for adopting that position are not worth
repeating here—well, not in detail, at any rate, but we should at least say that one of them was the
fact that most other attempts at defining an inheritance model seemed to have done the same thing
(see, e.g., reference [123]). Be that as it may, we did also say in reference [82] that we were
“actively investigating the possibility of revising our model ... to include [S by C].” We are happy
to be able to report that those investigations were successful, and our model—unlike just about
every other proposal we have seen in this connection—does now include S by C, as we now
proceed to explain. (In fact, it is our claim now that an inheritance model can be said to be good
only if it does include S by C. See Appendix F for further discussion of this point.)
       We begin by repeating from Chapter 12 the type definitions for types ELLIPSE and CIRCLE:
      TYPE ELLIPSE
           IS { PLANE_FIGURE
                POSSREP { A LENGTH, B LENGTH, CTR POINT
                          CONSTRAINT A  B } } ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           295
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                         Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


         TYPE CIRCLE
              IS { ELLIPSE
                   CONSTRAINT THE_A ( ELLIPSE ) = THE_B ( ELLIPSE )
                   POSSREP { R   = THE_A   ( ELLIPSE ) ,
                             CTR = THE_CTR ( ELLIPSE ) } } ;

     Now we focus on the “IS definition”—the <is def>, in Tutorial D terms—for type CIRCLE,
which specifies three things:

    1.   The name of the immediate supertype (ELLIPSE)

    2.   An additional constraint, to the effect that the semiaxes a and b must be equal for the ellipse
          to be a circle

    3.   A derived possrep (i.e., a possrep for circles that is derived from one for ellipses)

      Items 1 and 2 together constitute the required specialization constraint for type CIRCLE.
Note that (as required by IM Prescription 10) it is formulated in terms of type ELLIPSE; note
further that it is, precisely, the type constraint for type CIRCLE. In other words, it can be
interpreted as follows. In order for some value c to be of type CIRCLE, the following boolean
expression must evaluate to TRUE:
         IS_ELLIPSE ( c ) AND THE_A ( c ) = THE_B ( c )

         By way of example, consider the following ELLIPSE selector invocation:
         ELLIPSE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) )

This expression returns a value of most specific type CIRCLE, not ELLIPSE, because the value in
question does indeed cause the boolean expression just shown to evaluate to TRUE; in other words,
S by C occurs. In fact, the selector invocation in question, even though it names type ELLIPSE, is
logically equivalent to a certain selector invocation for type CIRCLE1—viz.:
         CIRCLE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) )

       Thus we see that S by C fundamentally implies that certain selector invocations will produce
results whose most specific type is some proper subtype of the designated target type. Incidentally,
it is worth pointing out explicitly that this fact does not constitute a violation of, or even an
extension to, RM Prescription 4 as stated in Chapter 4.
       Now suppose type CIRCLE has a proper subtype O_CIRCLE (where an “O-circle” is a circle
with center the origin):
         TYPE O_CIRCLE
              IS { CIRCLE
                   CONSTRAINT THE_CTR ( CIRCLE ) = POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 )
                   POSSREP { R = THE_R ( CIRCLE ) } } ;


1
  Observe too that the system knows exactly which selector invocation for type CIRCLE it is equivalent to, thanks to
the derived possrep specification.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       296
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                        Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


      Then the ELLIPSE selector invocation previously discussed now returns a value of most
specific type O_CIRCLE, not CIRCLE, because the value in question satisfies the constraint for
type O_CIRCLE as well. In other words, S by C implies that a given selector invocation will return
a value that—in accordance with the specified constraints—is of the most specific type possible.
      Recall now from Chapter 6 that, ultimately, the only way any expression can yield a value, of
any type, is via some selector invocation. It follows that S by C can usefully be thought of as being
implemented inside selector implementation code, using a procedure (“FIND_MST”) along the
following lines:1
        OPERATOR FIND_MST ( v value, t type ) RETURNS type ;
           let t1, t2, ..., tn be all of the immediate subtypes of t
           in some arbitrary order ;
           let the corresponding specialization constraints be IC1, IC2, ..., ICn,
           respectively ;
           DO i := 1 TO n ;
              IF v satisfies ICi THEN RETURN ( FIND_MST ( v, ti ) ) ; END IF ;
           END DO ;
           RETURN ( t ) ;
        END OPERATOR ;

    The procedure is initially invoked with the selected value and the selector declared type. For
example, in the case of the ELLIPSE selector invocation discussed earlier—
        ELLIPSE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) )

—the initial arguments are the indicated ellipse value and the type ELLIPSE.
      So much for the basic idea of S by C. But there is much, much more to be said on this topic:
so much, in fact, that it seemed better not to include it all in the body of the chapter—even though it
does logically belong here—but instead to relegate most of it to Appendix F. (Note, however, that
we do examine one particularly important aspect under IM Prescription 11 in the next section.) For
the present, therefore, we content ourselves with a few miscellaneous observations:

    ■   All nonroot types have an associated IS definition; no root type does (but note that all types
        are root types in the absence of inheritance support).

    ■   IM Prescription 10 states that “there shall exist at least one value of type T that does not
        satisfy constraint SC.” This statement is just a more precise version of the requirement of IM
        Prescription 2, as it applies to the case where T is a regular type (see IM Prescription 20), that
        there shall exist at least one value that is of type T and not of type T'. As we said earlier,
        proper subtypes are proper subsets.

    ■   Finally, we show for interest an example involving a user-defined subtype
        (EVEN_INTEGER) of a system-defined supertype (INTEGER):
        TYPE EVEN_INTEGER ORDINAL IS { INTEGER CONSTRAINT MOD ( INTEGER, 2 ) = 0 } ;



1
  Note carefully that we say can be thought of here. In practice, we envisage a much more efficient implementation of
S by C than this conceptual discussion might suggest (see Appendix F).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                      297
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                            Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


         We are assuming the availability of an operator called MOD (“modulo”) that takes two
         numeric arguments and returns the remainder that results after dividing the first by the second.
         Since type INTEGER is a system-defined type with no declared possrep, type
         EVEN_INTEGER has no declared possrep either. One consequence of this state of affairs is
         that in order to assign the value 4 (say) to a variable EI of type EVEN_INTEGER, we will
         have to use a statement of the form
         EI := TREAT_AS_EVEN_INTEGER ( 4 ) ;

         (See IM Prescription 14 for an explanation of TREAT.)


IM PRESCRIPTION 11: ASSIGNMENT WITH INHERITANCE

Consider the assignment
         V := X

(where V is a variable and X is an expression). DT(X) shall be a subtype of DT(V). The
assignment shall set MST(V) equal to MST(X) and v(V) equal to v(X).

                                               ———  ———

The model of a scalar variable introduced in IM Prescription 9 is useful in pinning down the precise
semantics of various operations, including assignment operations in particular. Consider the
following example:
         VAR E ELLIPSE ;
         VAR C CIRCLE ;

         C := CIRCLE ( ... ) ;
         E := C ;

       The first assignment here assigns some circle value to variable C (the expression on the right
side of that assignment is a CIRCLE selector invocation). The second assignment then copies that
circle value from variable C to variable E. (Of course, we could have simply assigned the result of
the CIRCLE selector invocation to variable E directly, without involving variable C at all.) After
that second assignment, then, the current most specific type of E will be CIRCLE, not ELLIPSE
(the declared type, of course, will still be ELLIPSE). Thus, whereas assignment without
inheritance1 requires the same type on both sides, assignment with inheritance means—thanks to
substitutability—that:

    ■    The declared type DT(X) of the expression on the right side can be any subtype of the
         declared type DT(V) of the variable on the left side (this is a compile-time check).



1
    And, in accordance with our discussion of this topic in Chapter 3, without coercions.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                298
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                           Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


    ■   The most specific type MST(X) of the value denoted by the expression on the right side can be
        any subtype of the declared type DT(V) of the variable on the left side. (In fact, of course, it
        must be some subtype of the declared type DT(X) of the expression on the right side, and so it
        is necessarily some subtype of DT(V).)

    ■   The variable V on the left side acquires its new most specific type, as well as its new value,
        from the value denoted by the expression X on the right side. Note: As pointed out earlier in
        this chapter, the most specific type of any value, and hence the most specific type of any
        variable that currently contains that value, is in fact implied by the value in question. It
        follows that the assignment must have the effect of setting MST(V) equal to MST(X), as well
        as setting v(V) equal to v(X), and there is no need to say as much in so many words; we do so
        only for explicitness.

      Observe, therefore, that what does not happen is that the value of the expression on the right
side gets “converted up” to the declared type of the variable on the left side. For if such a
conversion did occur, the value would lose its most specific properties (loosely speaking). In the
case at hand, for example, we would not be able to ask for the radius of E—more precisely, the
radius of the circle that is now the current value of E—because the circle would have been
converted to “just an ellipse,”1 and ellipses that are “just ellipses” do not have a radius.
      By the way, you might possibly see a problem here, and indeed there is one. To be specific,
the operator THE_R (“the radius of”) cannot validly be applied to a variable such as E whose
declared type is only ELLIPSE, not CIRCLE. IM Prescription 14 addresses this issue.
      Suppose we now continue the example as follows:
        VAR A AREA ;

        A := AREA ( E ) ;

        What happens now is the following:

    ■   First, the system performs a compile-time type check on the expression AREA(E), as required
        by OO Prescription 1; the check succeeds, because E is of declared type ELLIPSE and the
        single parameter to AREA is of declared type ELLIPSE also (see the outline definition of the
        AREA operator as shown earlier under IM Prescription 2).




1
  In fact, IM Prescriptions 8 and 10 both imply that such a conversion is logically impossible. For if it were possible, it
would mean that the very same value could have most specific type CIRCLE and most specific type ELLIPSE, thereby
violating IM Prescription 8; it would also mean that, after the assignment, the target variable would contain an ellipse
that could be “S by C’d” to a circle but has not been, thereby violating IM Prescription 10.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                            299
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                        Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


    ■   Second, the system notes that—let us assume—a version of AREA exists that applies to
        circles.1 (More generally, it will note all of the versions that apply to values of some proper
        subtype of type ELLIPSE, but in our example only one such subtype exists.)

    ■   Third, the system discovers at run time that the current value of E is of type CIRCLE. Since it
        already knows that CIRCLE is the most specific subtype of type ELLIPSE for which a
        distinct implementation version of AREA exists, it then invokes that version (i.e., it performs
        the run-time binding process mentioned in our discussion of IM Prescription 9).

        The fact that it is the circle version of AREA that is invoked might or might not be relevant to
the user; it might be, if the declared type of the result of the operation varies depending on whether
it is the circle version or the ellipse version that is invoked (it does not, in the case at hand). Note,
however, that this state of affairs—i.e., the fact that the user might like to know which version of
AREA is invoked—does not undermine our earlier claim to the effect that, so far as the user is
concerned, there is really just one AREA operator. See IM Prescriptions 16 and 17 for further
discussion of this issue.
        We now consider another example in order to make another important point:
        VAR E ELLIPSE ;

        E := ELLIPSE ( LENGTH ( 6.0 ), LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( ... ) ) ;
        THE_A ( E ) := LENGTH ( 5.0 ) ;

     After the first assignment, MST(E) is ELLIPSE, of course. After the second, however, it is
CIRCLE, thanks to S by C. To be more precise, the assignment to THE_A(E)—as we know from
Chapter 6—is really shorthand for the following longer assignment:
        E := ELLIPSE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), THE_B ( E ), THE_CTR ( E ) ) ;

The selector invocation on the right side of this longer assignment returns a circle, because it yields
a result with a = b = 5.0.
      Now suppose we execute another assignment on E:
        THE_A ( E ) := LENGTH ( 8.0 ) ;

It should be clear that MST(E) is now ELLIPSE again (because THE_A(E) is now greater than
THE_B(E)). We refer to this effect as generalization by constraint (G by C for short). Indeed, it
should be obvious that support for S by C implies support for G by C as well. (What is more, the
algorithm given under IM Prescription 10 for implementing S by C in fact implements G by C as
well, as should also be obvious. Though we should perhaps add that, unlike S by C, which occurs
on the invocation of some selector, G by C occurs on the execution of some assignment.)



1
  This step can be done at compile time or run time. Doing it at compile time means the run-time overhead of searching
for versions is avoided, but programs might need to be recompiled when new implementation versions are defined.
Doing it at run time means the possibly varying declared type of the result cannot be taken into account (and perhaps
taken advantage of) at compile time.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                      300
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                          Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


      We now observe that assignment, with S by C and G by C, is the key to the problem of
changing the current most specific type of some variable V from T1 to T2 (say), where the declared
type of V is some common supertype T of T1 and T2. For example, suppose we extend our running
example to include another type NONCIRCLE (an immediate subtype of ELLIPSE, like CIRCLE),
with the obvious semantics,1 and suppose once again that E is a variable of declared type ELLIPSE.
Suppose further that MST(E) is NONCIRCLE (implying that THE_A(E) > THE_B(E); along with
the fact that every noncircle is an ellipse, this condition is basically the type constraint for type
NONCIRCLE). Let THE_A(E) and THE_B(E) be eight and five, respectively. Now consider the
following assignment:
        THE_A ( E ) := LENGTH ( 5.0 ) ;

       After this assignment, E satisfies the condition THE_A(E) = THE_B(E), of course, and so
MST(E) is now CIRCLE instead of NONCIRCLE. In other words, we have changed the most
specific type of E “sideways,” as it were. Thus, S by C and G by C together take care of the
problem of changing types not only “upward” and “downward,” as we already know, but also
“sideways” (apologies for the sloppy manner of speaking here).
       One last point: We have been assuming in accordance with our discussion of such matters in
Chapter 3 that the assignment operator has not been overloaded in such a way as to permit DT(X)
not to be a subtype of DT(V), thereby effectively requiring coercion of v(X) to the type, declared or
current most specific, of V.2 Since IM Prescription 11 itself effectively assumes the same thing, it
will clearly need some revision if that assumption is jettisoned.


IM PRESCRIPTION 12: EQUALITY ETC. WITH INHERITANCE

Consider the equality comparison
        Y = X

(where Y and X are expressions). DT(X) and DT(Y) shall have a nonempty common subtype. The
comparison shall return TRUE if MST(Y) is equal to MST(X) and v(Y) is equal to v(X), FALSE
otherwise.

                                             ———  ———

Consider the following example:




1
    ELLIPSE now becomes a union type, incidentally (see IM Prescription 20).
2
  Such overloading might permit, e.g., the assignment of a U.K. sterling value to a variable of declared type U.S.
dollars, with implicit currency conversion from sterling to dollars. You might care to reflect on some of the
complexities involved in such an overloading, bearing in mind in particular the fact that currency conversion rates vary
over time.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                         301
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                           Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


         VAR E ELLIPSE ;
         VAR C CIRCLE ;

         IF E = C THEN ... END IF ;

      The comparison “E = C” here will evaluate to TRUE if and only if the current value of
variable E (a) is a circle—i.e., is of type CIRCLE—and (b) is in fact the same circle as the current
value of variable C. In general, the situation with respect to equality comparisons is analogous
(though not identical) to that with respect to assignments. To be more specific, whereas equality
comparison without inheritance1 requires the same type on both sides, equality comparison with
inheritance means—thanks to substitutability again—that:

    ■    The declared types DT(X) and DT(Y) of the expressions on the right and left side,
         respectively, must have some common supertype (this is a compile-time check). Note that
         this requirement is not explicitly stated in IM Prescription 12; however, we will show in the
         next chapter that it is in fact implied by the requirement—which is stated—that DT(X) and
         DT(Y) must have a nonempty common subtype.

    ■    The comparison will definitely give FALSE if the current most specific types of the
         comparands are different (a difference in type is certainly a logical difference), but will give
         TRUE if those most specific types are the same and the values are the same too. Note: Again
         we remind you that the most specific type of any value is implied by the value in question. It
         follows that if v(Y) and v(X) are the same, then MST(Y) and MST(X) must be the same too, and
         there is no need to say as much in so many words; we do so only for explicitness.

    ■    Under the disjointness assumption—which is to say, in the context of single inheritance—it
         should be clear that DT(X) and DT(Y) can have a nonempty common subtype only if one is a
         subtype of the other. If this condition is not satisfied, the comparison will fail on a compile-
         time type error. For example, if those declared types are ELLIPSE and RECTANGLE,
         respectively, then the comparison is not valid.

       The comparison Y ≠ X is equivalent to NOT (Y = X). The rules for “<“ etc., in the cases
where those operators apply, follow the same general pattern, though it might not be necessary to
insist in those cases that the most specific types of the comparands be the same in order for the
comparison to give TRUE. To repeat an example from Chapter 3, let 8 and 5 be values of most
specific type EVEN_INTEGER and ODD_INTEGER, respectively, where EVEN_INTEGER and
ODD_INTEGER have INTEGER as a common supertype. Then the comparison 8 > 5 can surely
(and reasonably) be defined in such a way as to give TRUE.
       One last point: We have been assuming in accordance with our discussion of such matters in
Chapter 3 that the equality comparison operator has not been overloaded in such a way as to permit
the comparison to give TRUE even if the most specific types of X and Y are not the same (in effect
requiring coercion of v(Y) to the type, declared or current most specific, of X or the other way



1
    And, in accordance with our discussion of this topic in Chapter 3 once again, without coercions.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                               302
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                        Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


around).1 Since IM Prescription 12 itself effectively assumes the same thing, it will clearly need
some revision if that assumption is jettisoned.


IM PRESCRIPTION 13: JOIN ETC. WITH INHERITANCE

Let rx and ry be relations with a common attribute A, and let the declared types of A in rx and ry be
DTx(A) and DTy(A), respectively. Consider the join of rx and ry (necessarily over A, at least in
part). DTx(A) and DTy(A) shall have a nonempty common subtype and hence shall also have a
most specific common supertype, T say. Then the declared type of A in the result of the join shall
be T.
      Analogous remarks apply to union, intersection, and difference operators. That is, in each
case:

    a.   Corresponding attributes of the operands shall be such that their declared types have a
          nonempty common subtype.

    b.   The declared type of the corresponding attribute of the result shall be the corresponding most
          specific common supertype.

                                           ———  ———

This prescription should be easy enough to understand as stated,2 but it is worth examining in detail
because it might be felt to be slightly counterintuitive in one particular respect. Consider the
relations RX and RY shown in Fig. 14.1; note that the sole attribute A in RX is of declared type
ELLIPSE and its counterpart A in RY is of declared type CIRCLE. We adopt the convention that
values in the figure of the form Ei are ellipses that are not circles and values of the form Ci are
circles. Most specific types are shown in lowercase italics.
╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║     ┌────┬─────────┐     ┌────┬────────┐     ┌────┬─────────┐   ║
║ RX │ A : ELLIPSE │ RY │ A : CIRCLE │ RJ │ A : ELLIPSE │         ║
║     ├════╧═════════┤     ├════╧════════┤     ├════╧═════════┤   ║
║     │ E1 : ellipse │     │ C2 : circle │     │ C2 : circle │    ║
║     │ C2 : circle │      │ C3 : circle │     └──────────────┘   ║
║     └──────────────┘     └─────────────┘                        ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 14.1: Join with inheritance (example)




1
  Such overloading might permit, e.g., a comparison to be performed between a U.K. sterling amount and a U.S. dollar
amount, with implicit currency conversion either way. Again, you might care to meditate on some of the complexities
involved in such an overloading.
2
 Except perhaps for the fact that if DTx(A) and DTy(A) have a nonempty common subtype, they necessarily do have a
most specific common supertype as well (see Chapter 15).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     303
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


      Now consider the join of RX and RY, RJ say (again, see Fig. 14.1). Clearly, every A value in
RJ will necessarily be of type CIRCLE (because any A value in RX whose most specific type is
merely ELLIPSE cannot possibly “compare equal” to any A value in RY). Thus, it might be
thought that the declared type of attribute A in RJ should be CIRCLE, not ELLIPSE. But consider
the following:

 ■    Since RX and RY each have A as their sole attribute, RX JOIN RY reduces to RX
      INTERSECT RY, and so the rule regarding the declared type of the result attribute for JOIN
      must reduce to the analogous rule for INTERSECT.

 ■    RX INTERSECT RY in turn is logically equivalent to RX MINUS (RX MINUS RY). Let the
      result of the second operand here—i.e., RX MINUS RY—be RZ. Then it is clear that:

      ●   RZ will include some A values of most specific type ELLIPSE, in general, and so the
          declared type of attribute A in RZ must be ELLIPSE.

      ●   The original expression thus reduces to RX MINUS RZ, where the declared type of
          attribute A in both RX and RZ is ELLIPSE, and hence yields a final result in which the
          declared type of attribute A must obviously be ELLIPSE once again.

 ■    It follows that the declared type of the result attribute for INTERSECT, and therefore for
      JOIN too, must indeed be as stated.

       The foregoing discussion takes care of RX MINUS RY, too. What about RY MINUS RX?
Clearly, every A value in the result of this latter expression will be of type CIRCLE, and so again it
might be thought that the declared type of A in that result should be CIRCLE, not ELLIPSE.
However, noting that RX INTERSECT RY is also logically equivalent to RY MINUS (RY MINUS
RX), we can quickly see that specifying the declared type of A in the result of RY MINUS RX to be
CIRCLE would lead to a contradiction. It follows that the declared type of the result attribute for
MINUS too must indeed be as stated.
       Finally, consider RX UNION RY. Here it should be obvious that the result will include some
A values of most specific type ELLIPSE, in general, and so the declared type of attribute A in that
result must necessarily be ELLIPSE. Thus, the declared type of the result attribute for UNION too
must be as stated (but in the case of UNION this situation can hardly be described as
counterintuitive).

Further Discussion

As you might perhaps expect, IM Prescription 13 has been the subject of much discussion between
the present authors; indeed, it has given rise to several comments and questions from readers of
previous editions of this book. The following question captures the essence of the issue at hand:

      Let RJ and RM be RX JOIN RY and RX MINUS (RX MINUS RY), respectively; also,
      assume (merely to simplify the discussion) that both expressions denote relations of
      cardinality one. Suppose that—IM Prescription 13 notwithstanding—the declared type of A




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        304
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


      in RJ is CIRCLE, while that of A in RM is ELLIPSE (because, let us assume, the system is
      unable to determine that RJ and RM are equivalent). What are the implications?

       One is that RM is now not always substitutable for RJ. For example, if C is a variable of
declared type CIRCLE, the assignment C := A FROM (TUPLE FROM RJ) is valid but the
assignment C := A FROM (TUPLE FROM RM) is not. The consequences of such a state of affairs
being unclear, we prefer to invoke The Principle of Cautious Design [46] and the mantra “Further
research is needed.” That way, if it proves possible to weaken IM Prescription 13 at a later time,
existing applications will still work even though certain of their TREAT invocations might have
become redundant (see IM Prescription 14).
       That further research, by the way, is likely to involve research into expression analysis (of the
kind used by optimizers, for example), in which case restriction conditions would perhaps need to
be taken into account also. For example, consider the logically equivalent expressions RX WHERE
FALSE and RX MINUS RX. As we will see in Chapter 16, the most specific type of attribute A in
the (empty) relation denoted by each of these expressions is omega—but is it reasonable to expect
that attribute to have that type as its declared type? And what if (for example) we replace that
FALSE by some less obvious contradiction, such as the very slightly less obvious one NOT (A =
A)? Consider also that for all relations r, r WHERE FALSE is equivalent to r JOIN TABLE_DUM.
       It is worth noting in passing that the SQL standard [99] is in agreement with IM Prescription
13.


IM PRESCRIPTION 14: TREAT

Let X be an expression, let T be a type, and let DT(X) and T have a nonempty common subtype.
Then an operator of the form
      TREAT_AS_T ( X )

(or logical equivalent thereof) shall be supported. We refer to such operators generically as
“TREAT” or “TREAT AS” operators; their semantics are as follows. First, if MST(X) is not a
subtype of T, then a type error shall occur. Otherwise:

 a.   If the TREAT invocation appears in a “source” position (for example, on the right side of an
      assignment), then the declared type of that invocation shall be T, and the invocation shall
      yield a result, r say, with MST(r) equal to MST(X) and v(r) equal to v(X).

 b.   If the TREAT invocation appears in a “target” position (for example, on the left side of an
      assignment), then that invocation shall act as a pseudovariable reference, which means it
      shall actually designate its argument X (more precisely, it shall designate a version of X for
      which DT(X) is equal to T but MST(X) and v(X) are unchanged).

                                      ———  ———

Consider the following code fragment once again:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        305
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


       VAR E ELLIPSE ;
       VAR C CIRCLE ;

       C := CIRCLE ( ... ) ;
       E := C ;

      As explained under IM Prescription 11, what does not happen here is that the circle value of C
gets converted to “just type ELLIPSE,” because if such a conversion were to occur, then we would
no longer be able to ask for the radius of the circle that is now the current value of E. Suppose now
that we do want to ask for that radius. We might try:
      VAR L LENGTH ;

      L := THE_R ( E ) ;        /* invoke “the radius of” : TYPE ERROR! */

      The expression on the right side of the assignment here gives a compile-time type error,
because variable E is of declared type ELLIPSE and THE_R is defined in terms of a parameter of
declared type CIRCLE (loosely, THE_R does not apply to ellipses). Note: If the compile-time type
check were not done, we would get a run-time type error instead—which is worse—if the current
value of E at run time were only an ellipse and not a circle. In the case at hand, of course, we do
know that the value at run time will be a circle; the trouble is, we know this, but the compiler does
not.
      TREAT is intended to address such situations. The correct way to obtain the radius in the
example is as follows:
      L := THE_R ( TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( E ) ) ;

     The expression TREAT_AS_CIRCLE(E) is defined to have declared type CIRCLE, so the
compile-time type checking now succeeds. Then, at run time:

 ■    If the current value of E is indeed of type CIRCLE, then the overall expression does correctly
      turn the radius of that circle. More precisely, the TREAT invocation yields a result, Z say,
      with (a) MST(Z) equal to MST(E), which is CIRCLE in the example, and (b) v(Z) equal to
      v(E); then (c) the expression “THE_R(Z)” is evaluated, to give the desired radius (which can
      then be assigned to L).

 ■    However, if the current value of E is only of type ELLIPSE, not CIRCLE, then the TREAT
      fails on a run-time type error.

    In other words, the expression TREAT_AS_CIRCLE(E) is logically equivalent to an IF-
THEN-ELSE expression along the following lines:
      IF IS_CIRCLE ( E )
         THEN CIRCLE ( THE_A ( E ), THE_CTR ( E ) )
         ELSE type error
      END IF

      The broad intent of IM Prescription 14 is to ensure that run-time type errors can occur only in
the context of a TREAT invocation.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      306
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance               Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


      Suppose now, as in our discussion of IM Prescription 10, that CIRCLE in turn has a proper
subtype, O_CIRCLE say, where an “O-circle” is a circle that is centered on the origin. Then the
current value of variable E at some given time might be of most specific type O_CIRCLE instead of
just CIRCLE. If it is, then the invocation
      TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( E )

will succeed, and will yield a result, Z say, with MST(Z) equal to O_CIRCLE, because O_CIRCLE
is the most specific type of E, and v(Z) equal to v(E). (The declared type is, of course, CIRCLE,
because of the “..._AS_CIRCLE” specification.) In other words (loosely): TREAT always leaves
the most specific type alone, it never “pushes it up” to make it less specific than it was before.
       Here now is an example of the use of TREAT in a pseudovariable context. Let the current
value of variable E, of declared type ELLIPSE, be of type CIRCLE (i.e., let MST(E) be some
subtype of CIRCLE). Now consider the following assignment:
      THE_R ( TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( E ) ) := LENGTH ( 5.0 ) ;

       Observe that the argument to THE_R on the left side is of declared type CIRCLE. Assume
for the moment that MST(E) is exactly CIRCLE, not some proper subtype of CIRCLE. Then the
assignment will set the value of E to be a circle with radius five (and with center unchanged, i.e.,
equal to THE_CTR(E) as it was prior to the assignment). MST(E) will still be CIRCLE after the
update.
       Now assume again that CIRCLE has a proper subtype O_CIRCLE, and the current value of E
is of most specific type O_CIRCLE instead of just CIRCLE. Then the assignment will set the value
of E to be an O-circle with radius five (MST(E) will still be O_CIRCLE after the update).
       Of course, we already know that THE_ pseudovariables are logically unnecessary. For
example, the assignment shown above is logically equivalent to the following:
      TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( E ) := CIRCLE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), THE_CTR ( E ) ) ;

And this assignment in turn is logically equivalent to the following (pseudocode):
      E := IF IS_CIRCLE ( E )
              THEN CIRCLE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), THE_CTR ( E ) )
              ELSE type error
           END IF ;

    By way of another example, assume again that the current value of E is of most specific type
O_CIRCLE, and consider the following assignment:
      THE_CTR ( TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( E ) ) := POINT ( 1.0, 0.0 ) ;

This one is equivalent to:
      TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( E ) := CIRCLE ( THE_R ( TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( E ) ),
                                        POINT ( 1.0, 0.0 ) ) ;

As a consequence, generalization by constraint occurs (see IM Prescription 11) and MST(E) ceases
to be O_CIRCLE and becomes CIRCLE instead.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     307
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                           Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


TREAT and Single Inheritance

Given the expression TREAT_AS_T(X), IM Prescription 14 requires only that T and DT(X) have a
nonempty common subtype (this is a compile-time check). In all of our discussions thus far,
however, T has actually been a proper subtype of DT(X)—in most cases, T has been CIRCLE and
DT(X) has been ELLIPSE—and the nonempty common subtype in question has thus just been T
itself (CIRCLE). And indeed T normally would be a proper subtype of DT(X) in practice; our
discussions have been completely realistic in this respect. But there is no reason to insist on this
state of affairs, and in fact it might be undesirable to do so if multiple inheritance is supported (see
the next chapter). With single inheritance, however, to say that T and DT(X) have a nonempty
common subtype is merely to say that one must be a nonempty subtype of the other (not necessarily
a proper subtype, of course). In terms of our usual variables E and C, for example, the expression
         TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( E )

is syntactically valid, as we already know (though it might fail at run time). More to the point, the
expression
         TREAT_AS_ELLIPSE ( C )

is also syntactically valid (and it cannot possibly fail at run time).
       Note: We do not mean to claim that an expression of the form TREAT_AS_ELLIPSE(C) is
particularly useful; we permit it mainly because there seems little reason not to—also because
general-purpose applications have a tendency to come up with surprising requirements of this
nature.

Syntactic Shorthands

Support for the following slightly more general form of TREAT (both operator and pseudovariable
versions) would also be desirable in practice:
         TREAT_AS_SAME_TYPE_AS ( Y, X )

     Here X and Y are scalar expressions such that DT(Y) and DT(X) have a nonempty common
subtype, and the overall expression is equivalent to the expression
         TREAT_AS_T ( X )

where T is DT(Y). Note: Since DT(Y) is known at compile time, this more general form of TREAT
is strictly unnecessary; we include it for reasons of user friendliness, convenience, and consistency
with the tuple- and relation-type versions of TREAT to be discussed in Chapter 16.
       Support for the following new relational operator1 would also be convenient in practice:
         R TREAT_AS_T ( A )



1
    And a tuple operator analog, too, and corresponding tuple and relational pseudovariables.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                               308
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                   Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


      Here R is a relational expression, A is an attribute of the relation denoted by that expression,
and T is a type. The overall expression is defined to be equivalent to the following:
      UPDATE R ( A := TREAT_AS_T ( A ) )

The obvious generalized form should be supported too:
      R TREAT_AS_SAME_TYPE_AS ( Y, A )


IM PRESCRIPTION 15: TYPE TESTING

Let X be an expression, let T be a type, and let DT(X) and T have a nonempty common subtype.
Then a logical operator of the form
      IS_T ( X )

(or logical equivalent thereof) shall be supported. The operator shall return TRUE if v(X) is of
type T, FALSE otherwise.

                                        ———  ———

The general intent here is simply that defining a given type should cause “automatic” provision of
an operator for testing values to see whether they are of the type in question. Note that the declared
type of the argument and the type in question must have a nonempty common subtype (this is a
compile-time check). Thus, for example, if E is of declared type ELLIPSE, the expression
      IS_SQUARE ( E )

is invalid (it will fail on a compile-time type error).

IS_T and Single Inheritance

Given the expression IS_T(X), T would typically be a proper subtype of DT(X) in practice. But
there is no reason to insist on this requirement, and in fact it might be undesirable to do so if
multiple inheritance is supported (see the next chapter). With single inheritance, however, to say
that T and DT(X) have a nonempty common subtype is merely to say that one must be a nonempty
subtype of the other (not necessarily a proper subtype, of course). In terms of our usual variables E
and C, for example, the expression
      IS_CIRCLE ( E )

is clearly valid (though it might give FALSE). More to the point, the expression
      IS_ELLIPSE ( C )




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         309
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                  Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


is also valid (and it cannot possibly give FALSE). Note: We do not mean to claim that an
expression of the form IS_ELLIPSE(C) is particularly useful; we permit it for the same kinds of
reasons we permit expressions like TREAT_AS_ELLIPSE(C).

Syntactic Shorthands

Support for the following slightly more general form of IS_T would be desirable in practice:
      IS_SAME_TYPE_AS ( Y, X )

     Here X and Y are scalar expressions such that DT(Y) and DT(X) have a nonempty common
subtype, and the overall expression is equivalent to the expression
      IS_T ( X )

where T is DT(Y). Note: Since DT(Y) is known at compile time, this more general form of IS_T is
strictly unnecessary; we include it for reasons of user friendliness, convenience, and consistency
with the tuple- and relation-type versions of TREAT to be discussed in Chapter 16.
       Support for the following new relational operator would also be convenient in practice:
      R : IS_T ( A )

      Here R is a relational expression and A is an attribute of the relation—r, say—denoted by that
expression. T and the declared type DT(A) of A must have a nonempty common subtype. The
value of the overall expression is a relation with:

 a.   A heading the same as that of r, except that the declared type of attribute A in that heading is
      T

 b.   A body consisting of those tuples of r in which attribute A contains a value of type T, except
      that the declared type of attribute A in each of those tuples is T

    Consider the following example. Suppose relvar R includes an attribute A of declared type
ELLIPSE. Then (assuming the obvious operator precedence) the expression
      R : IS_CIRCLE ( A ) WHERE THE_R ( A ) > LENGTH ( 2.0 )

returns those tuples of R in which the A value is a circle with radius greater than two—or, more
precisely, it returns a relation with (a) a heading the same as that of R, except that the declared type
of attribute A in that result is CIRCLE instead of ELLIPSE, and (b) a body consisting of just those
tuples from R in which the A value is of type CIRCLE and the radius for the circle in question is
greater than two. By contrast, the expression
      R WHERE THE_R ( A ) > LENGTH ( 2.0 )

is invalid—it fails on a compile-time type error—since THE_R is not defined for type ELLIPSE
(ELLIPSE being the declared type of attribute A of relation R).
      Note that the (valid) expression




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          310
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


      R : IS_CIRCLE ( A ) WHERE THE_R ( A ) > LENGTH ( 2.0 )

is almost but not quite equivalent to the following (also valid) expression:
      R WHERE CASE
                 WHEN IS_CIRCLE ( A ) THEN
                    THE_R ( TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( A ) ) > LENGTH ( 2.0 )
                 WHEN NOT ( IS_CIRCLE ( A ) ) THEN FALSE
              END CASE

      The difference is that this latter expression yields a relation with the same heading as R, rather
than one in which the declared type of attribute A is CIRCLE instead of ELLIPSE.
      More generally, however, the expression
      R : IS_T ( A )

is equivalent to, and therefore shorthand for, the following expression:
      ( R WHERE IS_T ( A ) ) TREAT_AS_T ( A )

Moreover, this latter expression is itself shorthand for a longer one (see the previous section).
      We observe that a slightly more general form of the “R:IS_T(A)” operator could also be
useful:
      R : IS_SAME_TYPE_AS ( Y, A )

Here Y is an expression such that DT(A) and DT(Y) have a nonempty common subtype, and the
overall expression is equivalent to the expression
      R : IS_T ( A )

where T is DT(Y). Note: Once again, since DT(Y) is known at compile time, this more general
form of the operator is strictly unnecessary; we include it for reasons of user friendliness,
convenience, and consistency with the tuple- and relation-type versions to be discussed in Chapter
16.
      Finally, we remark that “most specific type” counterparts to all of the foregoing operators
could also be provided if desired. For example, we could define the operator
      IS_MS_T ( X )

to give TRUE if MST(X) is T, FALSE otherwise. (It might help to observe that, e.g., whereas the
operator IS_ELLIPSE is perhaps best rendered into natural language as “is an ellipse,” the operator
IS_MS_ELLIPSE is probably better rendered as “is most specifically an ellipse”). Other possible
“most specific type” operators include the following (the semantics should be obvious in every
case):
 ■    IS_SAME_MS_TYPE_AS ( Y, X )

 ■    R : IS_MS_T ( A )




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         311
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                            Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


    ■    R : IS_SAME_MS_TYPE_AS ( Y, A )

      However, we see no compelling need for any of these operators; in fact, it is easy to see that
they are logically unnecessary (exercise for the reader).


IM PRESCRIPTION 16: READ-ONLY OPERATOR INHERITANCE
                    AND VALUE SUBSTITUTABILITY

Let Op be a read-only operator, let P be a parameter to Op, and let T be the declared type of P.
Then the declared type (and therefore, necessarily, the most specific type) of the argument A
corresponding to P in an invocation of Op shall be allowed to be any subtype T' of T. In other
words, the read-only operator Op applies to values of type T and therefore, necessarily, to values of
type T'—The Principle of (Read-Only) Operator Inheritance. It follows that such operators are
polymorphic, since they apply to values of several different types—The Principle of (Read-Only)
Operator Polymorphism. It further follows that wherever a value of type T is permitted, a value
of any subtype of T shall also be permitted—The Principle of (Value) Substitutability.

                                               ———  ———

As we have seen, subtyping implies that a reference to a variable of declared type T can in fact
denote a value of any subtype of T. What we have not emphasized prior to this point is that it also
implies that an invocation of a read-only operator with declared type T can likewise denote a value
of any subtype of T.1 This latter fact is an immediate consequence of The Principle of Value
Substitutability, as can be seen from the following rather trivial example:
         OPERATOR EORC ( B BOOLEAN ) RETURNS ELLIPSE ;
            RETURN ( IF B THEN ELLIPSE ( 5.0, 4.0, POINT ( 1.0, 2.0 ) )
                          ELSE CIRCLE ( 5.0, POINT ( 1.0, 2.0 ) )
                     END IF ) ;
         END OPERATOR ;

       Note that we are within our rights here when we specify in the ELSE portion of the IF ... END
IF expression that a circle be returned instead of “just an ellipse,” thanks to value substitutability.
Note too that the ELLIPSE selector invocation in the THEN portion does indeed return “just an
ellipse” and not a circle. Thus, an invocation of the read-only operator EORC returns either a circle
or just an ellipse, depending on the value of the argument corresponding to the BOOLEAN
parameter B.
       Here is a simpler example that illustrates much the same point:
         OPERATOR COPY ( E ELLIPSE ) RETURNS ELLIPSE ;
            RETURN ( E ) ;
         END OPERATOR ;

An invocation of COPY returns either a circle or just an ellipse, depending on the most specific type
of the argument corresponding to its ELLIPSE parameter E.

1
    Though we do know that this property applies to selectors in particular, thanks to S by C (see IM Prescription 10).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                           312
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                             Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


      Now, this property—that if Op is a read-only operator, then the most specific type of the
value returned from an invocation of Op can be any subtype T' of the declared type T of Op—is
sometimes referred to as result covariance, although we dislike this term for several reasons and do
not use it much ourselves. One reason we dislike it is this: The term is presumably meant to reflect
the fact that the type of the result “covaries” with the type of the argument (which is indeed what
happens in the COPY example). But there seems to be a tacit assumption that there is exactly one
argument! In the case of the operator MOVE, for example (see later in this section), the result type
covaries with the type of the first argument but not that of the second. Moreover, the result type can
“covary” even if the argument type remains fixed (see the EORC example), or even if there are no
explicit arguments at all (imagine an operator that returns a circle on weekdays but just an ellipse at
weekends).
      Be that as it may, note carefully that the “result covariance” phenomenon can occur even if
either of the following is true:

    ■   No separate implementation versions of Op have been defined as described under IM
        Prescription 17 (see EORC and COPY for examples)

    ■   No argument has a most specific type that is a proper subtype of the declared type of the
        corresponding parameter (see EORC for an example)

       Now we can explain the remark we made under IM Prescription 11 earlier to the effect that
(a) the fact that the user might like to know which implementation version of a given polymorphic
operator Op is invoked does not undermine (b) our claim that the user’s perception is still that there
is really just a single operator. The point is, the semantics of Op can—and should—be explained to
the user in such a way as to take into account any variations in the most specific types of its
arguments (if applicable). For example, the semantics of COPY are simply that it returns a copy of
its argument; thus, if it is passed a circle, it returns a circle, and if it is passed “just an ellipse,” it
returns “just an ellipse.” And the semantics of EORC are that it returns either a circle or “just an
ellipse,” depending on the value (FALSE or TRUE, respectively) of the argument corresponding to
the parameter B.
       Next, there is another concept, argument contravariance, that is also described in the
literature and seems to be vaguely related to the concept of result covariance. We do not include
this concept in our own inheritance model, however, because we believe it stems from (at best) a
confusion over the model vs. implementation distinction, and quite possibly from a flawed
definition of the very concept of subtype as well.1 On the other hand, we do think it worth trying to
explain what the concept is, in order to be able to explain exactly why we reject it. By way of
example, then, suppose we have an operator MOVE with a specification signature (see IM
Prescription 17) that looks like this:


1
   The definition in question is flawed because it is circular (not recursive!): “A type T' is a subtype of a type T if ... for
each method M of T there is a corresponding method M' of T' such that ... the ith argument type of M is a subtype of the
ith argument type of M' (rule of contravariance in arguments) ...” (paraphrased from reference [7], boldface added). In
other words, the concept of some type being a subtype of another is defined in terms of the concept of some type being
a subtype of another. Note too that the definition seems to be saying T' is a subtype of T if substitutability applies,
whereas we say that substitutability applies if T' is a subtype of T.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                               313
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                         Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


       MOVE ( ELLIPSE, SQUARE ) RETURNS ELLIPSE

       The purpose of MOVE is, loosely, to “move” its first argument (an ellipse) so that it is
centered on the center of the second (a square). More precisely, an invocation of MOVE returns a
result that is just like its first argument except that it is “located somewhere else”—it is, to repeat,
centered on the center of the second argument. The implementation code for (the most general
version of) this operator might look like this:
       OPERATOR MOVE ( E ELLIPSE, S SQUARE ) RETURNS ELLIPSE VERSION E_MOVE ;
          RETURN ( ELLIPSE ( THE_A ( E ), THE_B ( E ), CTR ( S ) ) ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;

      We have assumed that an operator CTR has been defined that returns the center of its
argument (a square). Also, the VERSION specification in the second line introduces a
distinguishing name, E_MOVE, for this particular version of MOVE (implementation versions are
discussed under IM Prescription 17).
      Now let us assume that for some reason1 another version of MOVE, C_MOVE say, has been
defined that moves circles in particular instead of ellipses in general (see IM Prescription 17 once
again):
       OPERATOR MOVE ( C CIRCLE, S SQUARE ) RETURNS CIRCLE VERSION C_MOVE ;
          RETURN ( CIRCLE ( THE_R ( C ), CTR ( S ) ) ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;

      This version always returns a circle, whereas the previous version (E_MOVE) sometimes
returns “just an ellipse.”
      Now let variables E and S be of declared types ELLIPSE and SQUARE, respectively, but
suppose the current value of E is of type CIRCLE. Consider the MOVE invocation
       MOVE ( E, S )

      The system performs a compile-time type check on this expression; that check succeeds, of
course. Then, at run time, it discovers that argument E is of type CIRCLE and argument S is of
type SQUARE, and it therefore invokes the version of MOVE that applies to circles and squares
(namely, C_MOVE). But it would also invoke C_MOVE if the declared type of the parameter
corresponding to argument S in C_MOVE were some proper supertype of SQUARE (a proper
supertype, that is, for which the concept of having a center makes sense). It might, for example, be
RECTANGLE, as here:2
       OPERATOR MOVE ( C CIRCLE, R RECTANGLE ) RETURNS CIRCLE
       VERSION C_MOVE ; /* revised */
          RETURN ( CIRCLE ( THE_R ( C ), CTR ( R ) ) ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;

1
  The exact reason is not important here—in fact, there might be no good reason at all. See IM Prescription 19 for
further discussion.
2
  Note that the revised version of C_MOVE shown here would not be valid in our model, however, because the version
signature is incompatible with the specification signature as previously defined (RECTANGLE is not a subtype of
SQUARE!) Once again, see IM Prescription 17 for a detailed discussion of signatures.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          314
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


       This property—that if the declared type of one parameter to operator Op (in some version of
Op) is further specialized, then the declared type of another parameter (in that same version of Op)
can be further generalized—is the argument contravariance property. Again, however, we dislike
this term for several reasons and do not use it much ourselves. One reason we dislike it is this: The
term is presumably meant to reflect the fact that the type of one argument “contravaries” with that
of another. But it is really parameters that “contravary,” not arguments, so at the very least the
term ought to be parameter contravariance. And in any case there seems to be a tacit assumption
that there are exactly two parameters! In the case of MOVE, there are indeed two parameters,
which “contravary”; but what if there had been three?
       Note further that “argument contravariance” differs from “result covariance” in that it must be
made explicit (by explicitly defining appropriate implementation versions of the operator in
question), because it refers to the declared types of parameters to such versions.
       Anyway, regardless of whether or not we accept the term “argument contravariance,” we
frankly do not find the concept very useful, nor very helpful. Rather, it seems clearer to us to talk in
terms of argument-type combinations. Consider the MOVE operator once again. Presumably the
person responsible for defining that operator will tell the user that it takes two arguments, of types
ELLIPSE and RECTANGLE respectively—please notice that RECTANGLE, not SQUARE as
previously—and returns a result of type ELLIPSE. (After all, to the user there is just one MOVE
operator, regardless of how many implementation versions might exist under the covers.) Then,
because of value substitutability, the user knows that:

 ■    The arguments to any given MOVE invocation can be of any subtypes of ELLIPSE and
      RECTANGLE, respectively.

 ■    The result can be of any subtype of ELLIPSE.

      However, the user also has to know that certain combinations of most specific argument types
are not allowed. To be precise:

 ■    The combination ELLIPSE-SQUARE (which corresponds to the implementation version
      called E_MOVE and gives a result of most specific type ELLIPSE) is allowed.

 ■    The combination CIRCLE-RECTANGLE (which corresponds to the version called C_MOVE
      and gives a result of most specific type CIRCLE) is allowed.

 ■    However, the combination ELLIPSE-RECTANGLE is not allowed.

       So the obvious question arises: Why did the person who defined the operator impose such a
strange restriction? Does it not constitute a violation of value substitutability? (After all, ELLIPSE
is a subtype of ELLIPSE and RECTANGLE is a subtype of RECTANGLE, so we should surely be
able to invoke the operator and pass it an ellipse per se and a rectangle per se.) In fact, the
restriction might be regarded as a violation of orthogonality too, because there is an unpleasant—
and unexplained—interdependence between the two arguments to any given invocation.
       We believe there is no good reason for imposing such strange restrictions. Therefore, IM
Prescription 16 requires simply that read-only operators be defined in such a way as to allow the




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         315
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


most specific type of any given argument to any given invocation of any given operator to be the
same as the declared type of the corresponding parameter. Indeed, it seems perverse to us to do
otherwise! And if this discipline is followed, then we can forget about the “argument
contravariance” concept entirely.
      Note: The foregoing paragraph needs a tiny refinement to take care of the possibility that a
parameter might be declared to be of some union type. A union type cannot be the most specific
type of anything, by definition (see IM Prescription 20). Hence, if parameter P has declared type T
and T is a union type, the most specific type of any argument corresponding to P is limited to being
some subtype of T', where T' is the least specific subtype of T that is not a union type. See IM
Prescription 20 for further explanation.


IM PRESCRIPTION 17: OPERATOR SIGNATURES

Any given operator Op shall have exactly one specification signature, a nonempty set of version
signatures, and a nonempty set of invocation signatures. For definiteness, assume the parameters
of Op and the arguments appearing in any given invocation of Op each constitute an ordered list of
n elements (n  0), such that the ith argument corresponds to the ith parameter. Then:

 a.   The specification signature shall denote Op as perceived by potential users. It shall consist of
      the operator name Op, the declared types (in order) of the parameters to Op, and the
      declared type of the result, if any, of executing Op. No two distinct operators shall have
      specification signatures that differ only in the declared types of their results (if any).
      Moreover, let S be a set of types with a nonempty common subtype. Then no two distinct
      operators shall have specification signatures that differ only in that, for some i, j, ..., k, the
      declared types of their ith parameters are distinct members of S, the declared types of their jth
      parameters are distinct members of S, ..., and the declared types of their kth parameters are
      distinct members of S.

 b.   There shall be one version signature for each implementation version V of Op. Each such
      signature shall consist of the operator name Op (and possibly the version name V), the
      declared types (in order) of the parameters to V, and the declared type of the result, if any, of
      executing V.

 c.   There shall be one invocation signature for each possible combination of most specific
      argument types to an invocation of Op. Each such signature shall consist of the operator
      name Op and the pertinent combination of most specific argument types (in order). Note:
      The invocation signatures for Op can easily be derived from the corresponding specification
      signature, but the concepts are logically distinct.

Every version of Op shall implement the same semantics.

                                      ———  ———




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        316
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                         Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


Although the point is not strictly part of our inheritance model per se, it is important to understand
that if the code that implements a given operator needs access to some possible representation1 of
some argument value v that is available only if v is of type T' and not just of type T, then—as
explained under IM Prescription 9—two distinct versions of that code will probably have to exist
under the covers. As also explained under IM Prescription 9, distinct implementation versions
might also be desirable, even if logically unnecessary, if improved efficiency can be achieved by
such means. Moreover, it is never logically wrong to implement additional versions, regardless of
whether they are actually necessary. Note: If distinct versions are not provided, then (as mentioned
under IM Prescription 9 once again) we have code reuse: The very same implementation code can
operate upon arguments of different types. Observe, however, that here we are talking about reuse
of “under the covers” code, not reuse of some program that invokes that “under the covers” code.
       As a consequence of the foregoing, it should be clear that we need to distinguish carefully
between any given operator Op as perceived by the user, on the one hand, and implementation
versions under the covers of that operator Op on the other. It should also be clear that we need to
distinguish carefully between the operator Op together with its implementation versions, on the one
hand, and various possible invocations of Op on the other. The concept of signatures is intended to
help make these distinctions.
       We can define the term signature (or operator signature, to be more specific), a little loosely,
as the combination of the name of the operator in question and the types of the operands and result
(if any) for that operator. As you have probably come to expect by now, however, we need to be
very careful once again over certain logical differences—namely, those between:

    ■     Arguments and parameters

    ■     Declared types and most specific types

    ■   Operators as seen by the user and operators as seen by the system (meaning, in this latter case,
        implementation versions of the operator under the covers)

        In fact, we can distinguish three kinds of signatures that apply to any given operator Op:2

    ■   First, there is exactly one specification signature, consisting of the operator name Op
        together with the declared types, in order, of the parameters (and the declared type of the
        result, if any), as perceived by potential Op users. For example, the specification signature for
        the operator MOVE (see IM Prescription 16) might look like this:
        MOVE ( ELLIPSE, RECTANGLE ) RETURNS ELLIPSE




1
    Or (worse) some physical representation.
2
  We should mention that different writers and different languages ascribe slightly different meanings to the term
signature anyway; for example, it is sometimes taken to include operand names (we do not include such names
ourselves because we are assuming for simplicity that argument/parameter matching is done on the basis of ordinal
position, as in Tutorial D).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          317
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                         Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


        The specification signature thus corresponds to the user’s understanding of what the operator
        looks like. More precisely, it is necessary but not sufficient for such an understanding; it is
        not sufficient, because it fails to capture the “result covariance” property. Unfortunately,
        none of the signatures is sufficient in this sense, as consideration of operator EORC will
        easily show.
             Note: It would be possible to capture more (though still not all) of the “result
        covariance” property by including parameter names in the specification signature and then
        allowing the RETURNS specification to refer to those names accordingly. Under such a
        scheme, the specification signature for MOVE might look like this:
        MOVE ( E ELLIPSE, R RECTANGLE ) RETURNS SAME_TYPE_AS ( E )

        The intent here is that an invocation of MOVE returns a result of the same declared type as
        that of the argument corresponding to its first (ellipse) parameter.1 However, it is easy to see
        that such a scheme is still inadequate, in general; for example, consider an operator that
        returns a square if invoked with a circle, but “just a rectangle” (not a square) if invoked with a
        noncircular ellipse.

    ■   Second, there is one version signature for each implementation version of Op, each
        consisting of the operator name Op (and possibly a version name) together with the declared
        types, in order, of the parameters (and the declared type of the result, if any) as defined for
        that version. For example, the following version signatures might have been defined for
        MOVE (note the version names):
        MOVE ( ELLIPSE, RECTANGLE ) RETURNS ELLIPSE VERSION ER_MOVE

        MOVE ( ELLIPSE, SQUARE ) RETURNS ELLIPSE VERSION ES_MOVE

        MOVE ( CIRCLE, RECTANGLE ) RETURNS CIRCLE VERSION CR_MOVE

        MOVE ( CIRCLE, SQUARE ) RETURNS CIRCLE VERSION CS_MOVE




1
  Suppose such syntax for specification signatures is in fact supported. Let variable C be of
declared type CIRCLE. Then the user might be allowed to write, e.g.,
        THE_R ( MOVE ( C, ... ) )


instead of what would otherwise be required, viz.:
        THE_R ( TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( MOVE ( C, ... ) ) )

Note that relaxing the rules (as it were) in this way would not depend on the existence of different implementation
versions, because the SAME_TYPE_AS specification guarantees that the result is of the declared type of the indicated
argument. Indeed, we would not consider the mere fact that different versions exist to be sufficient justification for
allowing TREATs to be omitted in such a manner (we certainly do not want to expose the concept of implementation
versions to the user). On the other hand, if it turns out that such TREATs cannot be omitted, then we might at least
expect the implementation to optimize them away, since they will effectively be “no ops.”




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        318
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance               Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


     The version signatures thus correspond to the various pieces of implementation code that
     implement the operator under the covers. We remark that the availability of version names
     implies among other things that it might be possible to destroy—i.e., drop—a specific version
     without having to destroy the corresponding operator in its entirety.
          By the way, we deliberately show a distinct version signature in the foregoing example
     for each possible combination of most specific argument types (i.e., one version signature for
     each possible invocation signature—see the next paragraph). In practice, however, it is
     unlikely that there will always be such a one-to-one match between version and invocation
     signatures. We will return to this point later in this section.
          Note: If overloading is supported, it might be necessary for certain version signatures to
     include a reference to the specification signature for the operator they implement—perhaps
     like this:
     MOVE ( CIRCLE, SQUARE ) RETURNS CIRCLE
     VERSION CS_MOVE FOR MOVE ( ELLIPSE, RECTANGLE )

     (Clearly there is no need to include the RETURNS portion of the specification signature,
     however.)

 ■   Third, there is one invocation signature for each possible combination of most specific
     argument types to an invocation of Op, each consisting of the operator name Op together with
     the corresponding combination of most specific argument types, in order (the result type, if
     any, is obviously irrelevant here). These signatures correspond to various possible
     invocations of Op. For example, the invocation signatures that apply to MOVE are basically
     as follows:
     MOVE ( ELLIPSE, RECTANGLE )

     MOVE ( ELLIPSE, SQUARE )

     MOVE ( CIRCLE, RECTANGLE )

     MOVE ( CIRCLE, SQUARE )

     Different invocation signatures involving the same operator thus correspond, at least
     potentially, to different implementation versions under the covers of the operator in question.
     Thus, if several versions of “the same” operator do in fact exist under the covers, then which
     version is invoked on any given occasion will depend on which version signature is the best
     match for the applicable invocation signature. The process of deciding that best match—i.e.,
     the process of deciding which version to invoke—is known variously as run-time binding (our
     own preferred term) or dynamic binding or dynamic dispatch or function resolution or subject
     routine determination (this last is the SQL term).
          Note: Actually, a certain amount of compile-time binding might be possible too, based
     on argument declared types (certainly known to the compiler) and version signatures (at least
     potentially known to the compiler). For example, if the user invokes MOVE with arguments
     of declared types CIRCLE and SQUARE, the compiler—rather than the run-time system—
     should be able to determine that the version CS_MOVE is the one to be invoked, since




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     319
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


      CIRCLE and SQUARE are both leaf types and no “lower” version of MOVE can possibly
      exist.

More on Run-Time Binding

Let Op be a polymorphic operator and let OpI be some invocation of Op. As we have seen, the
specific version of Op to be invoked for OpI will be determined on the basis of consideration of the
most specific types of the arguments to that invocation OpI. We propose that every argument be
able to participate equally in this process. In other words (and as in fact previously indicated under
OO Very Strong Suggestion 2 in Chapter 11), we do not much care for the notion, supported by
certain object systems, that an operator might have a special “distinguished” or “receiver” or
“target” parameter, such that the corresponding argument plays some special role in the run-time
binding process. To elaborate briefly: Treating one argument as special has the obvious advantage
that it makes the run-time binding process simpler—simpler for the system, that is—because that
process involves determining the most specific type of just that one argument. But it has certain
obvious disadvantages too, not the least of which is that it can make it harder for the implementer to
write the implementation code. For example:

 ■    Suppose the first MOVE argument (i.e., the ellipse-or-circle argument) is chosen as the
      special one. Then there could be at most two distinct implementation versions of MOVE, one
      for moving a circle and one for moving just an ellipse; in effect, versions ER_MOVE and
      ES_MOVE would be combined into a single version, E_MOVE say, and versions CR_MOVE
      and CS_MOVE would be combined into a single version, C_MOVE say.

 ■    So if the implementer wanted different implementation code depending on whether the
      second argument is a square or just a rectangle, then he or she might have to include explicit
      type testing and flow-of-control operations within both E_MOVE and C_MOVE, as well as
      possibly having to include both the square and rectangle code within both of those versions.

 ■    Alternatively, and probably preferably, E_MOVE and C_MOVE could both invoke a
      rectangle-or-square subroutine, and that routine in turn could have two distinct
      implementation versions, one for squares and one for nonsquare rectangles. But even with
      this preferred approach, the fact remains that the MOVE implementer has to do a certain
      amount of work that would and could be done much better by the system.

       Incidentally, it follows from the foregoing that the question of whether operator definitions
should be bundled in with type definitions (again, see OO Very Strong Suggestion 2) is not just a
matter of syntax. As a matter of fact, there is another, more pragmatic, argument against bundling
also. Bundling implies that adding a new operator will have to involve some kind of ALTER TYPE
operation. But the person defining the new operator might not have the ability or the authority to
alter an existing type (especially if the type in question is provided as part of some kind of off-the-
shelf “type package” from some third party). As a consequence, there is likely to be a strong
temptation to hack ... The hack in question consists in (a) defining a new subtype T' of the existing
type T that specifies CONSTRAINT TRUE (not permitted in our model—see IM Prescription 10),




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        320
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                         Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


so that every value of T is also a value of T', and then (b) bundling the new operator with that phony
subtype T' instead of with the supertype T where it “belongs.”
      To repeat, therefore, we propose that every argument should be able to participate equally in
the run-time binding process. However, there is a well-known practical (though not unsolvable)
problem here. By way of example, suppose (a) operator Op has a specification signature involving
two parameters, both of declared type ELLIPSE; (b) implementation versions are defined for the
most specific argument type combinations ELLIPSE-ELLIPSE, ELLIPSE-CIRCLE, and CIRCLE-
ELLIPSE (only); and (c) Op is invoked with the most specific argument type combination
CIRCLE-CIRCLE. The invocation signature here obviously does not exactly match any of the
corresponding version signatures. Clearly, therefore, rules are needed in order to determine which
particular version should be invoked—i.e., rules that define what the term best match (between
version and invocation signatures) really means. But we stress the point that such rules are an
implementation issue; they have nothing to do with the model as such.1

Semantics Must Not Change

The fact that it is always at least possible to define several implementation versions for the same
operator has one very important consequence: It opens up the possibility of changing the semantics
of the operator in question. For example, consider the following sequence of events:

    1.   Type ELLIPSE and the corresponding operator AREA are defined, but type CIRCLE is not
         defined yet. Variable E, of declared type ELLIPSE, is assigned an ellipse value for which a =
         b. The operator AREA is invoked on E, giving a result area1, say.

    2.   Type CIRCLE is now defined as a subtype of type ELLIPSE and a new version of AREA is
         implemented for this new type. Variable E is assigned the same ellipse value as before, but S
         by C now comes into play and MST(E) becomes CIRCLE. The operator AREA is invoked on
         E, giving a result area2, say.

      At this point we would surely like to be able to say that the comparison area1 = area2 must
give TRUE. However, this would-be requirement is not enforceable! That is, there is little to stop
AREA from being reimplemented for circles in such a way as to return, e.g., the circumference
instead of the area. (Careful type design can alleviate this problem somewhat; for example, if
operator AREA is defined to return a result of type AREA, obviously the implementation cannot
return a result of type LENGTH instead. It can, however, still return the wrong area.)
      Now, it has been claimed that “changing semantics” in the way just outlined can actually be
desirable. The following is an example of a situation in which such a claim might be made:

    1.   A type called HIGHWAY is defined, together with an operator called TRAVEL_TIME that
         computes the time it takes to travel between two points a and b on a highway h using the
         formula d/s, where d = distance between a and b and s = speed. The highway value h is


1
  Except inasmuch as (as we will see in the subsection immediately following) the model does require that all versions
implement the same semantics; in particular, therefore, it requires that distinct versions whose signatures are equally
good matches for a given invocation signature have the same result type.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        321
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


      assigned to a variable H of declared type HIGHWAY, and TRAVEL_TIME is invoked on H
      (and points a and b on h) and returns a result, tt1 say.

 2.   Type TOLL_HIGHWAY is now defined as a subtype of type HIGHWAY and a new
      implementation version of TRAVEL_TIME is defined for this new type using the formula
      (d/s)+(n*t), where n = number of tollbooths, t = time spent at each tollbooth, and d and s are
      as before.

 3.   Variable H is assigned the same highway value h as before. Assume for the moment that h is
      not a toll highway. Then invoking TRAVEL_TIME on H with the same points a and b as
      before gives the same result tt1 as before.

 4.   But suppose now that h is in fact a toll highway. Then S by C comes into play, MST(H)
      becomes TOLL_HIGHWAY, and invoking TRAVEL_TIME on H with the same points a and
      b as before gives a different result tt2.

      Now, of course it is true that the presence or absence of tollbooths does affect travel time. An
advocate of the idea that changing semantics can be desirable might therefore claim that the
foregoing state of affairs (in particular, the fact that tt1 ≠ tt2) is reasonable. However, we disagree
with this reasoning. We argue as follows:

 ■    If TOLL_HIGHWAY truly is a subtype of HIGHWAY, it means by definition that every
      individual toll highway is in fact a highway.

 ■    Thus, some highways (i.e., some values of type HIGHWAY) are indeed toll highways—they
      do indeed have tollbooths. So type HIGHWAY is not “highways without tollbooths,” it is
      “highways with n tollbooths,” where n might be zero (and type TOLL_HIGHWAY is
      “highways with n tollbooths” where n is greater than zero).

 ■    So the operator TRAVEL_TIME for type HIGHWAY is not “compute the travel time for a
      highway without tollbooths,” it is “compute the travel time for a highway ignoring tollbooths”
      (another logical difference here).

 ■    The operator TRAVEL_TIME for type TOLL_HIGHWAY, by contrast, is “compute the
      travel time for a highway not ignoring tollbooths.” So we have found yet another logical
      difference—the two TRAVEL_TIMEs are logically different operators. Confusion arises
      because those two different operators have been given the same name (in fact, the example is
      an example of overloading polymorphism, not inclusion polymorphism at all).

      Thus, we reject the suggestion that changing operator semantics can ever be a good idea. We
therefore define our model to say that if a change in semantics occurs, the implementation is in




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        322
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                          Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


violation—i.e., it is not an implementation of the model, and the implications are unpredictable.1
Indeed, it could be argued that the ability to change operator semantics (or, rather, the fact that some
writers seem to regard that ability as a virtue) is—like the business of “argument contravariance”
discussed earlier—a case of the implementation tail wagging the model dog.
      Observe that our position here does mean that, regardless of how many implementation
versions of operator Op are defined, the user perception remains the same: namely, that (a) there
exists a read-only operator—a single read-only operator, that is—called Op, and (b) that operator
Op applies to argument values of type T and hence, by definition, to argument values of any subtype
of T.

More on Compile-Time Binding

We pointed out earlier that it might be possible to perform some binding at compile time. In fact,
we now observe that it might be possible to perform all binding at compile time! Let T and T' be
supertype and subtype, respectively (as usual), and let Op be an operator that applies to values of
type T and therefore to values of type T' as well. Assume that Op does not apply to values of any
proper supertype of T. Assume also that both of the following conditions are satisfied:

    ■   Implementation versions of Op are provided for both type T and type T', but they implement
        the same semantics (as indeed our model requires).

    ■   Either (a) the implementation version for type T involves no access to the physical
        representation of values that are “just of type T” or (b) the physical representation of values
        that are “just of type T” is the same as that for values of type T'.

      Then no logical harm is done if an invocation of Op on a value of type T' is bound—at
compile time, potentially—to the version of Op that is defined for type T. (Performance might
suffer, but performance is not a model consideration.)
      Note: Of course, the foregoing argument does rely on an implementation version of Op being
defined for type T. If T is a dummy type, however, such a version might not exist, even if the
operator itself is indeed defined at the level of type T. In other words, the presence of dummy types
implies that some binding, at least, will probably have to be done at run time after all. See IM
Prescription 20 for further discussion.
      We conclude this subsection, and this section, by remarking that many of the concepts we
have been discussing at such length—inclusion polymorphism, value substitutability, result
covariance, argument contravariance, code reuse, implementation versions, version signatures,
invocation signatures, and run-time vs. compile-time binding—are not really features of the model,
as such, at all (despite the fact that you do need to understand them somewhat in order to appreciate
what inheritance and subtyping are really all about). The only thing that is truly relevant to the



1
  Of course, our model does not preclude support for genuine overloading polymorphism. In particular, if (a) T1 and
T2 are distinct subtypes of some dummy type T, (b) neither is a subtype of the other, and (c) an operator is defined for
T1 and another with the same name is defined for T2, then (d) there is no requirement, nor can there be, that those two
operators implement the same semantics.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          323
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                         Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


model is this: “To say that T' is a subtype of T means, by definition, that operators that apply to
values of type T apply to values of type T' also”—and the rest logically follows.


IM PRESCRIPTION 18: READ-ONLY PARAMETERS TO UPDATE OPERATORS

Let Op be an update operator and let P be a parameter to Op that is not subject to update. Then Op
shall behave as a read-only operator as far as P is concerned, and all relevant aspects of IM
Prescription 16 shall therefore apply, mutatis mutandis.

                                            ———  ———

This prescription does not seem to require any further explanation, except to say that the property of
“result covariance” is obviously irrelevant (update operators do not return a result).


IM PRESCRIPTION 19: UPDATE OPERATOR INHERITANCE AND VARIABLE
                    SUBSTITUTABILITY

Let Op be an update operator, let P be a parameter to Op that is subject to update, and let T be the
declared type of P. Then it might or might not be the case that the declared type (and therefore,
necessarily, the current most specific type) of the argument A corresponding to P in an invocation
of Op shall be allowed to be a proper subtype of type T. It follows that for each such update
operator Op and for each parameter P to Op that is subject to update, it shall be necessary to state
explicitly for which proper subtypes of the declared type T of parameter P operator Op shall be
inherited—The Principle of (Update) Operator Inheritance. (And if update operator Op is not
inherited in this way by type T', it shall not be inherited by any proper subtype of type T' either.)
Update operators shall thus be only conditionally polymorphic—The Principle of (Update)
Operator Polymorphism. If Op is an update operator and P is a parameter to Op that is subject
to update and T' is a proper subtype of the declared type T of P for which Op is inherited, then by
definition it shall be possible to invoke Op with an argument corresponding to parameter P that is
of declared type T'—The Principle of (Variable) Substitutability.

                                            ———  ———

First we explain why it does not make sense for update operators to be inherited unconditionally.1
Let variables R and S have declared types RECTANGLE and SQUARE, respectively. Then—
speaking very loosely!—it is possible to change the height of R without changing its width; more
precisely, it is possible to update R so as to replace the current rectangle value r1 by a new rectangle
value r2 that has the same width but a different height. However, it is certainly not possible to do
the same thing to S, because squares must always have equal height and width. In other words, a



1
 Unlike read-only operators! In fact, the arguments presented under this prescription constitute an important reason
why we continually stress the logical difference between read-only and update operators.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       324
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


certain update operator (“change height but not width”) is effectively defined for type
RECTANGLE but not type SQUARE.
      For a more probing example, we return to the operator MOVE from our discussion of IM
Prescription 16. Now, we previously made a tacit assumption that MOVE was a read-only operator
specifically. Here is the implementation code (ER_MOVE version):
      OPERATOR MOVE ( E ELLIPSE, R RECTANGLE ) RETURNS ELLIPSE VERSION ER_MOVE ;
         RETURN ( ELLIPSE ( THE_A ( E ), THE_B ( E ), CTR ( R ) ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

       As an aside, we observe that if ER_MOVE is implemented as shown, then the versions
ES_MOVE, CR_MOVE, and CS_MOVE are not needed—the ER_MOVE code works for those
other cases too, thanks to specialization by constraint! And thanks to generalization by constraint, it
would even work for O-circles too—where, just to remind you, an O-circle is a circle with center
the origin. (We deliberately ignored these points in our previous discussions under IM Prescriptions
16 and 17.)
       Since it is a read-only operator, MOVE returns a result, by definition. But suppose we made
it an update operator instead, thus:
      OPERATOR MOVE ( E ELLIPSE, R RECTANGLE ) UPDATES { E } VERSION ER_MOVE ;
         THE_CTR ( E ) := CTR ( R ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

       Instead of “returning a result that is just like its first argument except that it is located
somewhere else” (as we put it earlier), this revised operator actually updates its first argument. Of
course, that argument must be specified as a variable specifically; but that variable can be of
declared type CIRCLE or just declared type ELLIPSE. Like the read-only ER_MOVE code, in
other words, this update code works for circles as well as ellipses. Note, however, that it does not
work for O-circles, because updating a variable of declared type O_CIRCLE to change its center is
clearly invalid (the center for such a variable must be the origin and cannot be changed). What is
more, it is not just this particular code that does not work for O-circles; no code that attempts to
update the center of a variable of declared type O_CIRCLE can possibly work (unless the update is
in fact a “no op,” perhaps).
       It follows from the foregoing that, as already stated, update operator inheritance has to be
conditional (as indeed it is in our model). Essentially, what this means is that which update
operators are inherited by which subtypes must be specified explicitly. For example, we might
specify the following:

 ■    The update operators that apply to variables of declared type ELLIPSE are:

      ●     Assignment to THE_A, THE_B, THE_CTR

      ●     MOVE (update form)

 ■    The update operators that apply to variables of declared type CIRCLE are:

      ●     Assignment to THE_CTR and THE_R




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        325
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                          Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


         ●     MOVE (update form)

         Observe in particular, therefore, that pseudovariables THE_A and THE_B do not apply to
         variables of declared type CIRCLE. Note: In Tutorial D, in fact, we adopt the conservative
         position that pseudovariable THE_X applies to variables of declared type T if and only if
         either (a) T has a declared possrep with a component called X (this is the normal case)1 or,
         possibly, (b) T is a dummy type and pseudovariable THE_X applies to variables of each of its
         immediate subtypes (see the section on IM Prescription 20, subsection “Dummy Types,” later,
         for an explanation of this latter possibility).

    ■    The update operators that apply to variables of declared type O_CIRCLE are:

         ●     Assignment to THE_R

         MOVE (update form) and pseudovariable THE_CTR do not apply to variables of declared
         type O_CIRCLE.

      We now consider some of the consequences of the foregoing. Suppose we have variables E,
C, and O declared as follows:
         VAR E ELLIPSE ;
         VAR C CIRCLE ;
         VAR O O_CIRCLE ;

         Let the variables be initialized as follows:
         E := ELLIPSE ( LENGTH ( 6.0 ), LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 4.0, 3.0 ) ) ,
         C := CIRCLE   ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ), POINT ( 4.0, 3.0 ) ) ,
         O := O_CIRCLE ( LENGTH ( 5.0 ) ) ;

      Now consider the following updates (for simplicity we limit our attention to updates that are
assignments to pseudovariables specifically; we have numbered them for ease of subsequent
reference).

    1.   THE_A ( E ) := LENGTH ( 5.0 ) ;

         MST(E) is now CIRCLE, thanks to S by C. However, if we now try the following—

    2.   THE_R ( E ) := LENGTH ( 4.0 ) ;

         —we will get a compile-time type error, because assignment to THE_R does not apply to
         variables of declared type ELLIPSE. (More precisely, the error occurs because no possrep for
         type ELLIPSE has an R component, and hence no THE_R operator or pseudovariable is
         defined for that type.) By contrast, the following will work:

1
  Thus, if we were to declare an {a,b,ctr} possrep for type CIRCLE, then pseudovariables THE_A and THE_B would
be available for variables of declared type CIRCLE after all. However, any attempt to use them will fail if it violates
the constraint a = b.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                         326
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                         Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


    3.   THE_R ( TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( E ) ) := LENGTH ( 4.0 ) ;

         So will the following:

    4.   THE_A ( E ) := LENGTH ( 6.0 ) ;

         MST(E) is now ELLIPSE again, thanks to G by C.

    5.   THE_CTR ( C ) := POINT ( 0.0, 0.0 ) ;

         MST(C) is now O_CIRCLE. However, we can invoke the MOVE operator (update form) on
         it; the effect will be to set MST(C) back to CIRCLE again, thanks to G by C. By contrast, if
         we try to invoke the MOVE operator (update form) on the variable O, we will get a compile-
         time type error (we cannot “G by C” a variable to some proper supertype of its declared type,
         of course).

       As these examples illustrate, if update operator Op does not apply to variables whose declared
type is T, it certainly does not apply to variables whose declared type is any proper subtype of type
T.
       So much for the examples. For completeness, we now observe that (as noted under IM
Prescription 18) the property of “result covariance” does not apply to update operators, since update
operators do not return a result. The property of “argument contravariance” does apply, but we
reject that concept anyway. The remarks regarding code reuse, implementation versions,
signatures, and run-time binding under IM Prescriptions 16 and 17 apply to update operators also,
mutatis mutandis.
       We close this section by admitting that the question of update operator inheritance is one in
which our thinking might be regarded as a little controversial (heretical, some might say). To be
specific, some writers claim that update operators, like read-only operators, should be inherited
unconditionally, whereas we want them to be inherited only where they make sense.1 But it seems
to us that those who want such unconditional inheritance run into a variety of logical problems and
other undesirable consequences that our scheme avoids. For example:

    ■    They require update operators to return a value, thereby allowing retrieval operations to have
         the side effect of updating the database (as noted under RM Prescription 3 in Chapter 6).

    ■    Or they allow (e.g.) a value of type SQUARE to have sides of different lengths, thereby
         violating its own “squareness,” undermining the database “as a model of reality,” and causing
         programs to produce nonsensical results such as “nonsquare squares” or “noncircular circles.”

    ■    Or they do not support S by C or G by C.

1
  Actually our position here is not as controversial as it might seem. Nobody wants “:=” to be inherited
unconditionally; e.g., assignment of a value of most specific type ELLIPSE to a variable of declared type CIRCLE is
never valid (at least, not in any scheme we are aware of). And assignment is the only update operator that is logically
necessary! Thus, those who want update operators to be inherited unconditionally might be accused of a certain lack of
consistency.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        327
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


 ■    Or they simply do not support type constraints at all (see Appendix F for a detailed discussion
      of this particular—and important—issue).

      The common thread running through all such thinking is, it seems to us, a failure to make a
clear distinction between values and variables. To us, by contrast, that distinction is both crucial
and fundamental; indeed, as explained in Chapter 1, we regard it as one of the great logical
differences—one that underlies and buttresses our thinking throughout both The Third Manifesto
and the inheritance model currently under discussion.


IM PRESCRIPTION 20: UNION, DUMMY, AND MAXIMAL AND MINIMAL TYPES

A union type is a type T such that there exists no value that is of type T and not of some immediate
subtype of T (i.e., there is no value v such that MST(v) is T). A dummy type is a union type that
has no declared possible representation (and hence no selector); a given union type shall be
permitted to be a dummy type if and only if it is empty or it has no regular immediate supertype
(where a regular type is a type that is not a dummy type). Moreover:

 a.   Conceptually, there is a special scalar dummy type, alpha, that contains all scalar values.
      Type alpha is the maximal type with respect to every scalar type; by definition, it has no
      declared possible representation and no immediate supertypes.

 b.   Conceptually, there is a special scalar dummy type, omega, that contains no values at all.
      Type omega is the minimal type with respect to every scalar type; by definition, it has no
      declared possible representation and no immediate subtypes.

                                      ———  ———

In our discussion of IM Prescription 11, we briefly considered the possibility of introducing an
additional immediate subtype of type ELLIPSE called NONCIRCLE, with the obvious semantics.
Let us examine that possibility a little more closely. Here first is the definition of NONCIRCLE:
       TYPE NONCIRCLE
            IS { ELLIPSE
                 CONSTRAINT THE_A ( ELLIPSE ) > THE_B ( ELLIPSE )
                 POSSREP { A   = THE_A   ( ELLIPSE ) ,
                           B   = THE_B   ( ELLIPSE ) ,
                           CTR = THE_CTR ( ELLIPSE ) } } ;

      Type ELLIPSE now becomes a union type: Every ellipse is either a circle or a noncircle
(there is no value of type ELLIPSE that is not also a value of some immediate subtype of that type),
and so type ELLIPSE is the union—in fact, the disjoint union—of types CIRCLE and
NONCIRCLE. Note: Union type is the traditional term for the concept we have in mind here [19].
However, you should be aware that other terms are also found in the literature, including abstract
types (we mentioned this one briefly in Chapter 3), noninstantiable types (on the grounds that the
types in question have no “instances”), or sometimes just as interfaces. Types that are not union
types are then referred to as concrete types, instantiable types, or just types, respectively. (We have




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         328
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


changed our own terminology slightly, too; in reference [82], we called union types dummy types
and all other types regular types.)
       A union type is not the most specific type of any value at all. Thus, such a type must have
immediate subtypes—unless it is empty, a possibility we ignore until further notice—and every
value of the type must be a value of one of those immediate subtypes; the specialization constraints
for those immediate subtypes (see IM Prescription 10) must be such as to guarantee that this
requirement is met. Note that union types make sense only in an inheritance context, because they
rely on the existence of proper (in fact, immediate) subtypes. Note too that a union type must have
at least two immediate subtypes, thanks to IM Prescription 2.
       Why might it be desirable to define a union type? The major reason is that such a definition
provides a way of specifying operators that apply to values and variables of several different types,
all of them proper subtypes of the union type in question. Appropriate implementation versions of
the operator in question can then be defined, if necessary, at each of the applicable subtype levels.
For example:
      TYPE ELLIPSE UNION
           IS { PLANE_FIGURE
                POSSREP { A LENGTH, B LENGTH, CTR POINT
                          CONSTRAINT A  B } } ;

      TYPE CIRCLE
           IS { ELLIPSE
                CONSTRAINT THE_A ( ELLIPSE ) = THE_B ( ELLIPSE )
                POSSREP { R   = THE_A   ( ELLIPSE ) ,
                          CTR = THE_CTR ( ELLIPSE ) } } ;

      TYPE NONCIRCLE
           IS { ELLIPSE
                CONSTRAINT THE_A ( ELLIPSE ) > THE_B ( ELLIPSE )
                POSSREP { A   = THE_A   ( ELLIPSE ) ,
                          B   = THE_B   ( ELLIPSE ) ,
                          CTR = THE_CTR ( ELLIPSE ) } } ;

      OPERATOR AREA ( E ELLIPSE ) RETURNS AREA ;
         /* declared type of parameter E is a union type, but the following */
         /* implementation code works for both circles and noncircles:      */
         RETURN ( 3.14159 * THE_A ( E ) * THE_B ( E ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

      Observe that:

 ■    We require union types to be explicitly declared as such—see the UNION specification in the
      definition of type ELLIPSE. (In fact, PLANE_FIGURE, whose definition is deliberately not
      shown above, is a union type too. We will return to this point in the next subsection.)

 ■    Type ELLIPSE does have a declared possrep and hence a selector, but invoking that selector
      will never return a value of most specific type ELLIPSE (because there are no values of most
      specific type ELLIPSE).

 ■    A variable of declared type ELLIPSE will always have most specific type some proper
      subtype of ELLIPSE (because, again, there are no values of most specific type ELLIPSE).




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                       329
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


 ■    Operator AREA is defined at the ELLIPSE level, but it will never be invoked on a value that
      is of most specific type ELLIPSE. (To say it one more time, no such value exists.)

 ■    The fact that ELLIPSE is now a union type does not prevent operators from having declared
      (result) type ELLIPSE. The specification signature for our MOVE operator, for example
      (read-only version), will still specify a declared result type of ELLIPSE—but, of course, no
      MOVE invocation will now return a result of most specific type ELLIPSE.

 ■    We remark that the type constraint for type ELLIPSE in the example seems to be redundant.
      Given that the purpose of defining the union type in the first place was to reduce redundancy,
      in a sense, this state of affairs suggests that in practice we might not want to define too many
      union types with possreps. (Dummy types, which are union types without possreps, are
      another matter—see further discussion below.)

      Now, a union type obviously cannot be a leaf type (again, unless it is empty, a possibility we
continue to ignore until further notice). However, it would be possible to set up the type hierarchy
in such a way that all types except leaf types are union types; in terms of our running example,
introducing type NONCIRCLE as above, together with types NONRECTANGLE and
NONSQUARE (as immediate subtypes of POLYGON and RECTANGLE, respectively) would
have such an effect. “All most specific types must be leaf types” might thus be regarded as the
extreme form of the idea of union types, and some writers have indeed advocated such a notion.
Our model does not prohibit such an arrangement, but it does not insist on it, either; i.e., we allow
values to exist whose most specific type is, e.g., ELLIPSE and not CIRCLE, as we already know.

Dummy Types

A dummy type is a union type that has no possrep (and therefore in particular no possrep constraint).
A type that is not a dummy type is a regular type. By way of example, let us revise types
ELLIPSE, CIRCLE, and NONCIRCLE from the preceding discussion to make ELLIPSE a dummy
type, thus:
      TYPE ELLIPSE UNION
           IS { PLANE_FIGURE } ;
      TYPE CIRCLE
           IS { ELLIPSE
                POSSREP { R LENGTH, CTR POINT } } ;
      TYPE NONCIRCLE
           IS { ELLIPSE
                POSSREP { A LENGTH, B LENGTH, CTR POINT
                          CONSTRAINT A > B } } ;
      Observe that:

 ■    Type ELLIPSE is indeed now a dummy type: It has no possrep (and no possrep constraint)
      and no selector. Incidentally, it is worth pointing out explicitly that this fact does not
      constitute a violation of, or even an extension to, RM Prescription 4 as stated in Chapter 4.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        330
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                      Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


    ■   No “additional constraints”—see IM Prescription 10—have been specified for types CIRCLE
        and NONCIRCLE (since type ELLIPSE has no possrep in terms of which such constraints
        might be formulated). Thus, specialization by constraint now does not apply to those types;
        i.e., circles and noncircles are no longer obtained from ellipses via S by C.

    ■   Type CIRCLE does have a possrep (though, for simplicity, no possrep constraint) and a
        selector. It also has certain THE_ operators (THE_R and THE_CTR). Note that THE_A and
        THE_B now do not apply to type CIRCLE (nor to type ELLIPSE, of course).

    ■   Type NONCIRCLE also has a possrep and a selector (unlike type CIRCLE, it also has a
        possrep constraint). It also has certain THE_ operators (THE_A, THE_B, and THE_CTR).

    ■   Operators THE_A, THE_B, and THE_R do not apply to variables of declared type ELLIPSE,
        since that type has no possrep. (By contrast, THE_CTR might apply—see later.)

    ■   The ELLIPSE-level implementation version of the AREA operator that we showed earlier
        will no longer work (basically because of the lack of a possrep for type ELLIPSE).1 Instead,
        we will—in effect—have to give just an appropriate specification signature at the ELLIPSE
        level and then provide appropriate implementation versions at the CIRCLE and NONCIRCLE
        levels, as follows:
        OPERATOR AREA ( E ELLIPSE ) RETURNS AREA ;
           /* declared type of parameter E is a dummy type; */
           /* no implementation code provided at this level */
        END OPERATOR ;

        OPERATOR AREA ( E CIRCLE ) RETURNS AREA VERSION C_AREA ;
           /* implementation version for type CIRCLE */
           RETURN ( 3.14159 * THE_R ( E ) ** 2 ) ;
        END OPERATOR ;

        OPERATOR AREA ( E NONCIRCLE ) RETURNS AREA VERSION NC_AREA ;
           /* implementation version for type NONCIRCLE */
           RETURN ( 3.14159 * THE_A ( E ) * THE_B ( A ) ) ;
        END OPERATOR ;

      Now, the foregoing example is not very realistic, because we have already seen that if we
make ELLIPSE a regular union type (i.e., one with a possrep) instead of a dummy type, then we can
define an implementation version of AREA at the ELLIPSE level after all that will work for both
circles and noncircles. But consider type PLANE_FIGURE. That type would almost certainly be a
true dummy type—it is hard to think of a possrep that will work for an arbitrary plane figure!—and
it might well make sense to give a specification signature for AREA at the PLANE_FIGURE level
and implementation versions at (say) the ELLIPSE and POLYGON levels.
      Despite the foregoing, let us stay with the example of ELLIPSE as a dummy type, for
simplicity. Observe now that the operator THE_CTR applies to values of type CIRCLE and values

1
  These remarks should not be construed to mean that we can never specify implementation code at a dummy type
level. See the discussion of the DOUBLE_AREA example later in this subsection.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                     331
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                         Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


of type NONCIRCLE—i.e., values of every proper subtype of type ELLIPSE—and yet apparently
not to values of type ELLIPSE itself! (We say “apparently,” because type ELLIPSE has no possrep
from which such an operator can be derived.) But such a state of affairs is clearly absurd; to say
that every ellipse is either a circle or a noncircle, and circles and noncircles both have a center but
ellipses do not, is an affront to common sense. After all, compare the situation with areas: Every
ellipse has an area, because every ellipse is either a circle or a noncircle and circles and noncircles
both have an area, and so we do allow the operator AREA to be applied to variables of declared
type ELLIPSE. By analogy, therefore, we should surely be allowed to do the same with the
operator THE_CTR. (Indeed, if we did not do so, then THE_CTR would be a case of overloading
rather than inclusion polymorphism.)
       The foregoing anomaly is easily fixed, however: We simply allow the ELLIPSE type definer
to assert that THE_CTR does apply at the ELLIPSE level after all (since implementation versions of
that operator will certainly be provided at both the CIRCLE and NONCIRCLE levels).1 Thus, for
example, the assignment
       P := THE_CTR ( E ) ;

(where P is of declared type POINT and E is of declared type ELLIPSE) is effectively shorthand for
something like the following:
        P := CASE
                WHEN IS_CIRCLE ( E ) THEN THE_CTR ( TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( E ) )
                WHEN IS_NONCIRCLE ( E ) THEN THE_CTR ( TREAT_AS_NONCIRCLE ( E ) )
             END CASE ;

       Likewise, the assignment
       THE_CTR ( E ) := P ;

(where P and E are as before and THE_CTR is being used as a pseudovariable) is effectively
shorthand for something like the following:
        E := CASE
                WHEN IS_CIRCLE ( E )
                   THEN CIRCLE ( THE_R ( TREAT_AS_CIRCLE ( E ) ), P )
                WHEN IS_NONCIRCLE ( E )
                   THEN NONCIRCLE ( THE_A ( TREAT_AS_NONCIRCLE ( E ) ),
                                     THE_B ( TREAT_AS_NONCIRCLE ( E ) ), P )
             END CASE ;

      By the way, we do not mean to suggest by everything we have said in this subsection so far
that implementation code for operators defined at some dummy-type level must be provided at the


1
  Note that THE_CTR here is indeed a THE_ operator in the usual sense (i.e., it has prescribed semantics, and those
semantics must not be overridden). In particular, it can be used as a pseudovariable—a fact that suggests that simply
providing a specification signature at the ELLIPSE level might not quite be adequate as a mechanism for “asserting that
THE_CTR does apply” (since other operators defined in such a fashion are generally not usable as pseudovariables).
Note also that the provision of THE_ operators for a dummy type does not constitute a violation of, or even an
extension to, RM Prescription 5 as stated in Chapter 4.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        332
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


level of the pertinent supertypes. By way of a simple counterexample, we might define an operator
called DOUBLE_AREA, with the obvious semantics, at the ELLIPSE level or even (more
strikingly) at the PLANE_FIGURE level, thus:
      OPERATOR DOUBLE_AREA ( PF PLANE_FIGURE ) RETURNS AREA ;
         RETURN ( 2 * AREA ( PF ) ) ;
      END OPERATOR ;

       We close this subsection with a few miscellaneous observations. First, note that it follows
from IM Prescription 20 that if T is a nonempty dummy type, then all of its proper supertypes are
nonempty dummy types too (because “a [nonempty] type shall be permitted to be a dummy type if
and only if ... it has no regular immediate supertype”).
       Second, recall from RM Prescription 4 that certain system-defined types—and, as we saw
under IM Prescription 10, proper subtypes thereof—are allowed to have no possrep; type INTEGER
is a case in point. Such a type is not a dummy type, however, because (a) values do exist, in
general, whose most specific type is the type in question and (b) the type is still required to have at
least one associated selector that permits the specification of literals of the type in question.
       Last, we remark that some systems use dummy types as a way of providing type generator
functionality. For example, RELATION might be a dummy type in such a system (with generic
operators JOIN, SUMMARIZE, and so forth), and every specific relation type would then be a
proper subtype of that dummy type. We do not adopt such an approach in the Manifesto, however,
because we certainly do not want our support for type generators to rely on support for inheritance.
We note too that the approach seems to imply that specific implementation code must be provided
for each specific join, each specific summarize, and so forth (instead of reusing generic, optimized,
system-provided code)—surely not a very desirable state of affairs! Finally, we observe also that
the kind of “relation type inheritance” this approach to a RELATION type generator seems to entail
is not the kind of relation type inheritance we think we need (in particular, it does not provide the
kind of substitutability we think we need). See Chapter 16 for a detailed discussion of our own
approach to relation type inheritance.

Alpha and Omega

We did not discuss the point in detail before, but it is an immediate consequence of IM Prescription
7 that there can be any number of distinct type hierarchies. If there is more than one, however, we
can always invent some kind of “system” type that is an immediate supertype for the root types for
all of those hierarchies, thereby effectively tying all of those hierarchies together into one. In fact,
some object systems come ready equipped with such a type, often called OBJECT (on the grounds
that “everything is an object”).
       In our model, we address this issue by introducing a special type that we call type alpha
(mentioned in passing in a footnote under IM Prescription 9). Alpha is the maximal scalar type:
It contains all scalar values and is a supertype of every scalar type; more precisely, it is a proper
supertype of every scalar type except itself, and an immediate supertype of every scalar type that
would otherwise be a root type.
       Analogously, we introduce another type that we call type omega (previously discussed briefly
under IM Prescription 8). Omega is the minimal scalar type: It contains no values at all and is a




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         333
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                        Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


subtype of every scalar type; more precisely, it is a proper subtype of every scalar type except itself,
and an immediate subtype of every scalar type that would otherwise be a leaf type.
      Note: The remarks in the previous two paragraphs assume that types alpha and omega are
explicitly defined and thus included in the type hierarchy (or type graph, rather, in the case of
omega). In practice, however, we would not expect them to be explicitly defined. They are useful
primarily from a conceptual point of view (though they do turn out to be important in connection
with tuple and relation type inheritance—see Chapter 16). In what follows, we will assume they are
not explicitly defined, barring explicit statements to the contrary.
      Now for more specifics. First, type alpha:

    ■   Alpha is indeed a dummy type—it has no possrep and hence no selector.

    ■   The corresponding type constraint is just TRUE.1

    ■   IS_alpha(X) always gives TRUE.

    ■   TREAT_AS_alpha (...) always succeeds.

     As for type omega (which, perhaps surprisingly, turns out to be more important than type
alpha in certain respects, as we will see in the next two chapters):

    ■   Omega is also a dummy type—it has no possrep and hence no selector. Note: Omega is truly
        a union type, as all dummy types must be, because by definition there is no value of type
        omega that is not of some immediate subtype of omega. (You might want to read that
        sentence again.)

    ■   The corresponding type constraint is just FALSE.
    ■   IS_omega(X) always gives FALSE.

    ■   TREAT_AS_omega (...) always fails.

    ■   No variable, no operator, and in fact no expression can have either declared type or most
        specific type omega.

    ■   Type omega inherits all possible read-only operators, but vacuously so, since they can never
        be invoked on any value of the type.

      Finally, we repeat the point that since it is a subtype of every scalar type, the introduction of
type omega takes us, by definition, into the realm of multiple inheritance. (This is one reason why
we believe it makes little logical sense to consider single inheritance only—despite the fact that we
have been doing exactly that for most of this chapter! But we were doing so for pedagogical



1
  Alpha and omega are exceptions to the general rule that dummy types, having no possrep, therefore have no type
constraint.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        334
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


reasons, not logical ones.) Indeed, the introduction of omega into any given type “hierarchy” has
the effect of converting that “hierarchy” into a lattice. See Chapter 15 for further discussion.


EXERCISES

14.1   A possrep constraint implies that certain selector invocations will fail. By contrast, a
       specialization constraint implies that certain TREAT invocations will fail. Are these
       statements true or false?

14.2   Given your answer to Exercise 12.11—”Define an operator to rotate a specified rectangle
       through 90° about its center”—define an implementation version of that operator for
       squares.

14.3   A conic section (conic for short) is a curve in (x,y)-space, defined by the equation ax² - 2px +
       y² = 0. If a < 0, the conic is a hyperbola; if a = 0, it is a parabola; if a > 0, it is an ellipse
       (and if a = 1, the ellipse is a circle). Define a corresponding set of types. Note: You will
       need some additional knowledge regarding conic sections in order to answer this exercise.

14.4   Write Tutorial D definitions for types HIGHWAY and TOLL_HIGHWAY (see IM
       Prescription 17). Also write the code for the TRAVEL_TIME operator(s).

14.5   If C is a variable of declared type CIRCLE, assignment to THE_A(C) and THE_B(C) is not
       supported. What is the formal reason for this state of affairs?

14.6   Let CHAR_n (n  0) be a family of types such that a value v is a value of type CHAR_n if
       and only if it is a character string of no more than n significant characters (where a character
       is significant if and only if it is not a trailing space). Do you agree that type CHAR_n' is a
       subtype of type CHAR_n if and only if n'  n? Does value substitutability apply? Are there
       any operators that apply to values of type CHAR_n' and not to values of type CHAR_n?
       Does S by C apply? Is there a nonempty type that is a subtype of all possible types in the
       family?

14.7   Following on from the previous exercise, consider the character string literal 'ABC ' (note
       the trailing space). What is the declared type of this literal? What is the most specific type?

14.8   Let T' be a proper subtype of type T. It has been conjectured that if the only operators that
       apply to values and variables that are of type T' and not of type T are those that are provided
       “automatically”—THE_ operators, selectors, “=”, “:=”, TREAT_AS_T, and IS_T
       operators—then type T' was probably not worth defining in the first place. Discuss.

14.9   In the body of this chapter, we made repeated use of the polymorphic operator AREA. The
       polymorphism in question was inclusion polymorphism, of course. However, we did also
       suggest that AREA might be the name of a selector operator for type AREA, in which case
       AREA becomes overloaded too. Write an appropriate set of specification signatures for all
       of these various AREA operators.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         335
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                Chapter 14 / Single Inheritance with Scalar Types


14.10 Can the implementation of TREAT_AS_T and IS_T be automated? Do these operators
      apply to built-in types?

14.11 Let T' be an existing type. What is involved in introducing a new proper supertype T of T'?
      Does it make any difference if T' is built in, not user defined?

14.12 The Tutorial D syntax for defining a proper subtype (under single inheritance) includes a
      specification of the form IS {<scalar type name> ...}. Does it make sense for the specified
      <scalar type name> to be the name of a generated type?

14.13 As noted several times in the body of this chapter, we prohibit coercion. In fact, it has been
      argued that coercion, if supported, would undermine substitutability; for example, if passing
      a circle to some operator where an ellipse was expected were to cause that circle to be
      coerced to type ELLIPSE, then it would become “just an ellipse” and would lose its circle-
      specific properties (e.g., its radius). Discuss.

14.14 Consider the following type definition. Can you see anything wrong with it?
       TYPE BETA ... POSSREP { X alpha ... } ... ;

       What about this one?
       TYPE GAMMA ... POSSREP { X omega ... } ... ;

14.15 No variable can have declared type omega; but what about an attribute (within some tuple or
      relation type)?

14.16 Let types T1 and T2 be defined as follows:
       TYPE T1 POSSREP { CONSTRAINT FALSE } ;

       TYPE T2 POSSREP { CONSTRAINT FALSE } ;

       Clearly, these types are both empty; yet they have different names. In accordance with RM
       Prescription 1, therefore, are they not different types? Discuss.
             Incidentally, what would happen if we deleted the specification CONSTRAINT
       FALSE from both of the foregoing type definitions?




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                     336