                                                  Chapter 15

             Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types

In this chapter we consider what happens to our inheritance model when we take multiple
inheritance into account. It will turn out that none of the 20 IM Prescriptions discussed in the
previous chapter needs any extension or reformulation; however, a couple of them, IM Prescriptions
7 and (especially) 8, do merit a much closer look. But first things first.
       To review briefly, multiple inheritance is the phenomenon according to which a given subtype
can have more than one immediate supertype and can therefore inherit operators and constraints
from more than one such supertype (a simple example is given in the section immediately
following). As noted in Chapter 12 and elsewhere, it is our position that multiple inheritance
support is not only desirable but logically required. As reference [131] says:

      Most modern ... systems allow [multiple inheritance] ... A generally accepted view is that a modern ... language
      should support [multiple inheritance], despite the fact that [it] introduces many conceptual and technical
      intricacies.

       We will be examining some of those “conceptual and technical intricacies” in this chapter.
Note: For simplicity, we continue to follow the convention that the unqualified terms type, subtype,
and supertype refer to scalar types, subtypes, and supertypes specifically; the unqualified terms
value, variable, (read-only) operator, expression, and result refer to scalar values, variables,
operators, expressions, and results specifically; and the unqualified term constraint refers to a type
constraint specifically. We also continue to assume that all of the types under discussion are
members of some given set of types S and that the root and leaf type concepts in particular are to be
understood in terms of that set S. Finally, we continue to use the symbols T and T' to refer
generically to a pair of types such that T' is a subtype of T—equivalently, such that T is a supertype
of T'.


AN INTRODUCTORY EXAMPLE

In order to introduce some of the basic concepts of multiple inheritance, we use a simple variation
on our geometric example from Chapters 12 and 14, involving parallelograms, rectangles, rhombi,
and squares. (Just to remind you, a rhombus is a parallelogram whose sides are all the same length.)
Fig. 15.1 shows a graph—a directed acyclic graph, to be precise—of the subtype/supertype
relationships in this example. Observe that type PARALLELOGRAM is a root type, type
SQUARE is a leaf type, and type SQUARE has two immediate supertypes, RECTANGLE and
RHOMBUS.
       To see that the subtype/supertype relationships in the figure are indeed reasonable, consider
the following:

 ■    Every parallelogram has a “long” diagonal of length ld and a “short” one of length sd, where
      ld  sd.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                        337
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance              Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                        ┌───────────────┐                        ║
║                        │ PARALLELOGRAM │                        ║
║                        └──────┬────────┘                        ║
║                       ┌───────┴─────────┐                       ║
║                                                                 ║
║                ┌───────────┐        ┌─────────┐                 ║
║                │ RECTANGLE │        │ RHOMBUS │                 ║
║                └──────┬────┘        └────┬────┘                 ║
║                       └───────┬─────────┘                       ║
║                                                                 ║
║                          ┌────────┐                             ║
║                          │ SQUARE │                             ║
║                          └────────┘                             ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 15.1: A simple type graph

 ■    Every parallelogram also has two “long” sides of length ls and two “short” ones of length ss,
      where ls  ss.

 ■    A rectangle is a parallelogram for which ld = sd. Unlike parallelograms in general, every
      rectangle has a unique circumscribed circle (i.e., a circle that passes through each of the
      rectangle’s four vertices); hence, every rectangle has a property, unique to rectangles alone
      among parallelograms, that is exactly that circumscribed circle.

 ■    A rhombus is a parallelogram for which ls = ss. Unlike parallelograms in general, every
      rhombus has a unique inscribed circle (i.e., a circle that touches each of the rhombus’s four
      sides); hence, every rhombus has a property, unique to rhombi alone among parallelograms,
      that is exactly that inscribed circle. (We remark in passing that a parallelogram that is not a
      rhombus is sometimes called a rhomboid.)

 ■    A square is a parallelogram that is both a rectangle and a rhombus. Unlike rectangles and
      rhombi in general, every square has a unique associated annulus that is defined by the
      difference between the corresponding circumscribed and inscribed circles; hence, every
      square has a property, unique to squares alone among rectangles and rhombi, that is exactly
      that annulus. Moreover, every square has both (a) a unique side, which rectangles in general
      do not have, and (b) a unique diagonal, which rhombi in general do not have.

Possible Representations

It is instructive to consider the question of what possreps we might specify in this example. (You
might want to sketch a parallelogram of your own in order to help you appreciate the points to be
made in what follows.) Let p be a parallelogram with vertices (in clockwise sequence) A, B, C, D
and center E. Then it should be clear that there are many different ways of “possibly representing”
p. Here are some of them:

 ■    We could use the four vertices A, B, C, and D. Of course, it is not the case that every set of
      four points defines a parallelogram; we would therefore have to impose an appropriate
      constraint on the points A, B, C, D. There are several different ways to state that constraint,




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        338
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                      Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


        too. For example, we could require that line segments AB and DC be parallel and line
        segments BC and AD be parallel also; or we could require that line segments AB and DC be
        of equal length and line segments BC and AD be of equal length also; or possibly other ways
        besides. Note too that A, B, C, and D must all be distinct!—and no three of them can be
        collinear.

    ■   We could use any three of the vertices (A, B, and C, say). Here the only constraint we would
        have to impose is that the three points are not collinear (but note again that there are several
        different ways to state such a constraint). Of course, there are four possible choices for the set
        of three vertices.

    ■   We could use any two adjacent vertices (A and B, say) and the center E. Here again the only
        constraint we would have to impose is that the three points are not collinear. There are four
        possible choices for the pair of adjacent vertices.

    ■   We could use any two adjacent sides—AB and BC, say. Here we would have to impose the
        constraint that the line segments AB and BC do in fact meet at B (and A, B, and C are not
        collinear). There are four possible choices for the pair of adjacent sides.

    ■   We could use a pair of opposite sides—AB and DC, say—with the constraint that those two
        sides are parallel and of equal length. There are two choices here.

    ■   We could use the diagonals AC and BD, with the constraint that they bisect each other at E.

    ■   We could use a pair of adjacent half-diagonals—EA and EB, say—with the constraint that the
        line segments do in fact meet at E (and E, A, and B are not collinear). Four choices here.

    ■   We could use one vertex, an angle, and two lengths (for example, the point A, the angle DAB,
        and the lengths of the sides AB and AD). The angle must not be 180°. Four choices.

And so on, probably.

Type Definitions

Let us agree, somewhat arbitrarily, to specify just one possrep for type PARALLELOGRAM: viz.,
the one involving the four vertex points A, B, C, D.1 Let us also agree to use that same possrep for
each of the other three types as well. Of course, we already know that three vertices would suffice
(in fact, just two—which two?—would suffice in the case of type SQUARE). We have chosen to
specify all four, despite the redundancy, for reasons of symmetry; i.e., there does not seem to be any
good argument in favor of any particular three over any other. Perhaps more study is required.
Note in particular that our choice does mean that the components of the possrep are not mutually
independent (see the discussion of such matters under RM Prescription 5 in Chapter 6). One


1
  Some convention, left unspecified here, would be needed in practice to establish which point corresponds to which
vertex, in order to ensure that references to (e.g.) angle DAB are unambiguous.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                       339
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance               Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


possibly undesirable consequence of this state of affairs is discussed at the end of the present
subsection.
      Here then is a possible definition for the root type PARALLELOGRAM:
      TYPE PARALLELOGRAM
           POSSREP { A POINT, B POINT, C POINT, D POINT
                     CONSTRAINT DISTINCT ( A, B, C, D )
                                AND NOT ( COLLINEAR ( A, B, C ) )
                                AND NOT ( COLLINEAR ( B, C, D ) )
                                AND NOT ( COLLINEAR ( C, D, A ) )
                                AND NOT ( COLLINEAR ( D, A, B ) )
                                AND DIST ( A, B ) = DIST ( C, D )
                                AND DIST ( B, C ) = DIST ( D, A ) } ;

We are appealing here to:

 ■    A presumably built-in operator called DISTINCT, which returns TRUE if and only if its
      arguments are all distinct

 ■    An operator called COLLINEAR (code not given), which returns TRUE if and only if its
      three POINT arguments lie on a straight line

 ■    The operator DIST from Chapter 3, which takes two points and returns the distance between
      them as a value of type LENGTH

      Here next is a possible definition for type RECTANGLE:
      TYPE RECTANGLE
           IS { PARALLELOGRAM CONSTRAINT
                                 LD ( PARALLELOGRAM ) = SD ( PARALLELOGRAM )
                              POSSREP { A = THE_A ( PARALLELOGRAM ) ,
                                         B = THE_B ( PARALLELOGRAM ) ,
                                         C = THE_C ( PARALLELOGRAM ) ,
                                         D = THE_D ( PARALLELOGRAM ) } } ;

      We have assumed the availability of two operators LD and SD (see the subsection
“Operators” later), which return the length of the “long” and the “short” diagonal, respectively, of a
given parallelogram. Incidentally, the POSSREP specification here lends weight to the suggestion
from Chapter 12 that it might be convenient to have some syntactic shorthand for defining a subtype
possrep that is similar or identical to some corresponding supertype possrep.
      Next, type RHOMBUS:
      TYPE RHOMBUS
           IS { PARALLELOGRAM CONSTRAINT
                                 LS ( PARALLELOGRAM ) = SS ( PARALLELOGRAM )
                              POSSREP { A = THE_A ( PARALLELOGRAM ) ,
                                         B = THE_B ( PARALLELOGRAM ) ,
                                         C = THE_C ( PARALLELOGRAM ) ,
                                         D = THE_D ( PARALLELOGRAM ) } } ;
      We have assumed the availability of two operators LS and SS (again, see the subsection
“Operators” later), which return the length of the “long” and the “short” side, respectively, of a
given parallelogram.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          340
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


      Finally, type SQUARE:
      TYPE SQUARE
           IS { RECTANGLE, RHOMBUS
                POSSREP { A = THE_A ( RECTANGLE ) ,
                          B = THE_B ( RECTANGLE ) ,
                          C = THE_C ( RECTANGLE ) ,
                          D = THE_D ( RECTANGLE ) } } ;

      The specialization constraint here states precisely that a given value s is of type SQUARE if
and only if IS_RECTANGLE(s) and IS_RHOMBUS(s) both evaluate to TRUE. No additional
CONSTRAINT specification is stated, or indeed permitted. In general, in fact, such an additional
constraint is required if and only if (a) the subtype being defined has exactly one immediate
supertype and (b) that supertype is regular. (Just to remind you, a type is regular if it is not a
dummy type; in other words, a regular type is a type with at least one possrep and hence at least one
selector.)
      A few further points arise in connection with the foregoing definitions:

 ■    It seems we have to make an arbitrary decision in the POSSREP specification for type
      SQUARE. To be specific, we have to decide whether to define that possrep in terms of type
      RECTANGLE or in terms of type RHOMBUS. Purely for definiteness, we have defined it in
      terms of RECTANGLE, but we could equally well have defined it in terms of RHOMBUS
      instead (or even, perhaps, a mixture of the two!)—a situation that might be regarded as a little
      unsatisfactory. Note: The discussions in the section “Remarks on Operator Inheritance,” later
      in this chapter, might have some bearing on this issue.

 ■    As we have already seen, there are many distinct but logically equivalent candidate possreps
      that could have been used in this example. It follows that there are many distinct but logically
      equivalent ways of formulating the corresponding specialization constraints (at least for types
      RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS, though not for type SQUARE, of course).

 ■    Our choice of possrep for type PARALLELOGRAM does have the advantage that operators
      THE_A, THE_B, THE_C, and THE_D are all available for parallelograms (and hence for
      rectangles, rhombi, and squares as well). What is more, corresponding pseudovariables are
      available for all four types too, by definition. However, any attempt to use those
      pseudovariables will fail if it violates some applicable constraint; in fact, any attempt to
      update just one vertex in isolation will necessarily fail (this state of affairs is a consequence of
      our decision to include some redundancy in the possreps). For example, consider what is
      involved in doubling the height of a rectangle (more precisely, updating a variable V of
      declared type RECTANGLE such that the values returned by AD(V) and BC(V)—see the
      operator definitions in the next subsection—are twice what they were before the update).

Operators

In this subsection we show definitions—the final few just in outline—for a set of operators that
would surely prove useful in practice in connection with the foregoing example. (We will not




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                           341
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance             Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


actually be using these operators in the rest of the chapter; we show them here merely by way of
illustration.)
       OPERATOR AB ( P PARALLELOGRAM ) RETURNS LENGTH SYNONYMS { BA, CD, DC } ;
          /* “length of side AB”; note the SYNONYMS specification, which     */
          /* defines additional names for the same operator                  */
          RETURN ( DIST ( THE_A ( P ), THE_B ( P ) ) ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;

       OPERATOR BC ( P PARALLELOGRAM ) RETURNS LENGTH SYNONYMS { CB, AD, DA } ;
          /* “length of side BC”; note the SYNONYMS specification, which     */
          /* defines additional names for the same operator                  */
          RETURN ( DIST ( THE_B ( P ), THE_C ( P ) ) ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;

       OPERATOR AC ( P PARALLELOGRAM ) RETURNS LENGTH SYNONYMS { CA } ;
          /* “length of diagonal AC” */
          RETURN ( DIST ( THE_A ( P ), THE_C ( P ) ) ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;

       OPERATOR BD ( P PARALLELOGRAM ) RETURNS LENGTH SYNONYMS { DB } ;
          /* “length of diagonal BD” */
          RETURN ( DIST ( THE_B ( P ), THE_D ( P ) ) ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;

       OPERATOR DAB ( P PARALLELOGRAM ) RETURNS ANGLE SYNONYMS { BAD, BCD, DCB } ;
          /* “included angle at vertex A” */
          RETURN ( ARCCOS ( ( AB ( P ) ** 2 + AD ( P ) ** 2 - DB ( P ) ** 2 )
                            / ( 2 * AB ( P ) * AD ( P ) ) ) ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;

       OPERATOR ABC ( P PARALLELOGRAM ) RETURNS ANGLE SYNONYMS { CBA, ADC, CDA } ;
          /* “included angle at vertex B” */
          RETURN ( ARCCOS ( ( BA ( P ) ** 2 + BC ( P ) ** 2 - AC ( P ) ** 2 )
                            / ( 2 * BA ( P ) * BC ( P ) ) ) ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;

       OPERATOR LS ( P PARALLELOGRAM ) RETURNS LENGTH ;
          /* “length of long side of” */
          RETURN ( MAX { AB ( P ), BC ( P ) } ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;

       OPERATOR SS ( P PARALLELOGRAM ) RETURNS LENGTH ;
          /* “length of short side of” */
          RETURN ( MIN { AB ( P ), BC ( P ) } ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;

       OPERATOR LD ( P PARALLELOGRAM ) RETURNS LENGTH ;
          /* “length of long diagonal of” */
          RETURN ( MAX { AC ( P ), BD ( P ) } ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;

       OPERATOR SD ( P PARALLELOGRAM ) RETURNS LENGTH ;
          /* “length of short diagonal of” */
          RETURN ( MIN { AC ( P ), BD ( P ) } ) ;
       END OPERATOR ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        342
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance            Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


       OPERATOR AREA ( P PARALLELOGRAM ) RETURNS AREA ;
          /* “area of” */
          ... ;
       END OPERATOR ;

       OPERATOR CTR ( P PARALLELOGRAM ) RETURNS POINT ;
          /* “center of” */
          ... ;
       END OPERATOR ;

      All of the foregoing operators apply to parallelograms, and hence to rectangles and rhombi,
and hence to squares as well. Note in particular that type SQUARE inherits these operators from
both of its immediate supertypes RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS, a point we will return to in the
section “Remarks on Operator Inheritance.”
      The following operators, by contrast, do not apply to parallelograms in general:
     OPERATOR CIR_CIRCLE ( RE RECTANGLE ) RETURNS CIRCLE ;
        /* “circumscribed circle of” */
        ... ;
     END OPERATOR ;

     OPERATOR IN_CIRCLE ( RH RHOMBUS ) RETURNS CIRCLE ;
        /* “inscribed circle of” */
        ... ;
     END OPERATOR ;

     OPERATOR ANNULUS ( S SQUARE ) RETURNS ANNULUS ;
        /* “annulus of” */
        ... ;
     END OPERATOR ;

     OPERATOR SIDE ( S SQUARE ) RETURNS LENGTH ;
        /* “side of” */
        ... ;
     END OPERATOR ;

     OPERATOR DIAG ( S SQUARE ) RETURNS LENGTH ;
        /* “diagonal of” */
        ... ;
     END OPERATOR ;


TYPE GRAPHS

As we saw in Chapter 12, single inheritance can be characterized as follows: Every proper subtype
has exactly one immediate supertype. Multiple inheritance means, by contrast, that every proper
subtype has at least one immediate supertype. In Fig. 15.1, for example, the proper subtypes
RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS each have one immediate supertype, PARALLELOGRAM, and the
proper subtype SQUARE has two, RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS. The obvious question arises:
Could we additionally define PARALLELOGRAM as an immediate supertype of SQUARE? In
terms of Fig. 15.1, such a definition would involve an additional directed arc from type
PARALLELOGRAM to type SQUARE. Could we add such an arc?




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                   343
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance              Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


      Well, observe first of all that PARALLELOGRAM is not an immediate supertype of
SQUARE as defined by IM Prescription 6, because there does exist a type that is both a proper
supertype of SQUARE and a proper subtype of PARALLELOGRAM. (In fact, of course, there are
two such types, RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS.) At the very least, therefore, we would have to
revise IM Prescription 6 if we wished to permit the additional arc. So do we wish to permit it?
      We answer this question in the negative. It seems to us that permitting such an additional arc
does not lead to any useful additional functionality; to be specific, all of the operators and
constraints that type SQUARE would then inherit “immediately” from type PARALLELOGRAM it
already inherits anyway, transitively, via the intermediate types RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS.
Furthermore, permitting such an extension to our understanding of the term immediate supertype
certainly has the potential to complicate some of our later concepts and definitions unduly. We
therefore reject such an extension. As already indicated, we do not need to change our model in any
way to achieve this effect—IM Prescription 6 already takes care of matters for us.
      Now, multiple inheritance clearly implies that we can no longer talk about type hierarchies as
such; instead, we need to introduce the more general concept of a type graph. Here is a precise
definition of this concept. A type graph is a directed acyclic graph of nodes and directed arcs from
one node to another that satisfies the following properties:

 a.   Each node is given the name of a type. No two nodes have the same name.

 b.   There is a directed arc from node T to node T' if and only if type T is an immediate supertype
      of type T'.

 c.   If there is a directed arc from node T to node T', then node T' is not reachable from node T via
      any other path. Note: A path from node T to node T' is a sequence of n directed arcs A1
      (from T to T1, say), A2 (from T1 to T2, say), ..., An (from T(n-1), say, to T'), where n  0, and
      n = 0 implies T = T' (i.e., there is always a path from node T to itself). A node T' is reachable
      from a node T if and only if there is a path from node T to node T'.

 d.   If the graph includes any nodes at all, then—because it is directed and acyclic—it necessarily
      contains at least one node that has no immediate supertype node. Such a node is called a root
      node, and the type corresponding to that node is called a root type.

 e.   If the graph includes any nodes at all, then—because it is directed and acyclic—it necessarily
      contains at least one node that has no immediate subtype node. Such a node is called a leaf
      node, and the type corresponding to that node is called a leaf type.

 f.   If nodes T1 and T2 are distinct root nodes, then no node other than node omega (if such a
      node exists) is reachable from both T1 and T2.

 g.   If nodes T1, T2, T', and T'' are such that there exist paths from both T1 and T2 to both T' and
      T'', then there must exist a node T that is common to all of those paths.

      Explanation:




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                        344
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


 ■    Points a. and b. are self-explanatory.

 ■    Point c. simply reflects the fact that (as discussed earlier in this section) no type T can be both
      an immediate and a nonimmediate supertype of the same type T'.

 ■    Points d. and e. are obvious generalizations of the corresponding portions of the “type
      hierarchy” definition for the single inheritance case. Note that a root can be regarded as an
      entry point into the overall type graph. As the definition indicates, we do not assume that
      there is exactly one root type; if there are two or more, however, we can always introduce
      some kind of “system” type—perhaps type alpha—that is an immediate supertype for all of
      them, and so there is no loss of generality in assuming just one.

 ■    Point f. is discussed in the next section. As for point g., see Exercise 15.7 at the end of the
      chapter.

     Of course, type graphs, like type hierarchies before them, are not really part of our model per
se—they are just a convenient way of depicting subtype/supertype relationships, which are.


LEAST SPECIFIC TYPES UNIQUE

As noted earlier in this chapter, we do need to take a closer look at IM Prescriptions 7 and
(especially) 8. We discuss IM Prescription 7 in this section and IM Prescription 8 in the next. We
begin by repeating IM Prescription 7 (“root types disjoint”) from the previous chapter:

 7.   If T1 and T2 are distinct root types, then they shall be disjoint; i.e., no value shall be of both
      type T1 and type T2.

       Now, with single inheritance, this prescription was tightly connected to the disjointness
assumption (“If types T1 and T2 are such that neither is a subtype of the other, then they are
disjoint”). With multiple inheritance, of course, that assumption no longer applies. For example,
types RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS in Fig. 15.1 are certainly not disjoint, yet neither is a subtype
of the other (because some rectangles are not rhombi and some rhombi are not rectangles). Of
course, those values that are both rectangles and rhombi are, precisely, squares; note, however, that
until such time as we actually introduce type SQUARE as a subtype of both type RECTANGLE
and type RHOMBUS, we still do not have multiple inheritance as such. Thus, in order to support
multiple inheritance, it is necessary but not sufficient that we relax the disjointness assumption.
(More precisely, if we relax it for leaf types only, we do not have multiple inheritance; if we relax it
for nonleaf types, we do.)
       We do not have to relax that assumption completely, however, nor do we wish to. Rather, we
proceed as follows. First, we introduce the concept of least specific type: If value v is of type T
and not of any proper supertype of T, then we say that T is the least specific type of v (obviously T
here must be a root type). Then we go on to insist that the least specific type of any value must be
unique—which is what IM Prescription 7 says (at least, it is logically equivalent to what IM
Prescription 7 says). As a consequence, a graph like the one shown in Fig. 15.2 is not a valid type




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          345
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


graph, because it shows a proper subtype, SQUARE, with two distinct proper supertypes,
RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS, that are both root types. Note: Our reasons for insisting on the
uniqueness of least specific types will become clear in the next section.
╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                ┌───────────┐        ┌─────────┐                 ║
║                │ RECTANGLE │        │ RHOMBUS │                 ║
║                └──────┬────┘        └────┬────┘                 ║
║                       └───────┬─────────┘                       ║
║                                                                 ║
║                          ┌────────┐                             ║
║                          │ SQUARE │                             ║
║                          └────────┘                             ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 15.2: A graph that is not a valid type graph

     It follows from the foregoing that any given type graph can be divided into a set of partitions,
one per root, such that:

 ■    Within any given partition, every node is connected to every other. Explanation: When we
      say some node T0 is connected to some node Tn, we mean that either (a) T0 = Tn (by
      definition, every node is connected to itself) or (b) there exists a sequence of n directed arcs
      A0, A1, ... A(n-1), say (where n  1), such that A0 is from T0 to T1 or vice versa, A1 is from
      T1 to T2 or vice versa, ..., and An is from T(n-1) to Tn or vice versa.

 ■    No node in any given partition is connected to any node in any other partition (in other words,
      the partitions are disjoint)—unless the graph includes a node for type omega; by definition,
      such a node would be common to every partition. In this latter case, the omega node would
      be connected to every node, and those “partitions” would no longer truly be partitions as such.
      (But even then it would still be the case that no value is a value of two distinct types T1 and
      T2 such that T1 and T2 belong to distinct partitions.)

       Observe that any given partition is always fully connected, in the sense that every node in that
partition is connected to every other node in that partition. What is more, if we introduce type
omega into the type graph, each of those partitions becomes (by definition) a lattice [8]; and if we
introduce type alpha as well, the entire graph becomes a single partition (and a single lattice).
       To close this discussion, here again is point f. from the definition of type graph in the
previous section:

 f.   If nodes T1 and T2 are distinct root nodes, then no node other than node omega (if such a
      node exists) is reachable from both T1 and T2.

It should be obvious from the foregoing discussion that this point is an immediate consequence of
IM Prescription 7.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         346
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


MOST SPECIFIC TYPES UNIQUE

Now we turn to IM Prescription 8 (“scalar values with inheritance”):

 8.   Every set of types T1, T2, ..., Tn shall have a common subtype T' such that a given value is of
      each of the types T1, T2, ..., Tn if and only if it is of type T'.

      As we know from Chapter 14, with single inheritance this prescription leads to the important
consequence that every value has a unique most specific type. Is the same true for multiple
inheritance? In order to investigate this question, it is convenient to start from the other end, as it
were. To be specific, we will begin with a simplified version of the prescription that is tailored for
single inheritance as such:

      Let value v be of type T. If and only if no proper subtype T' of type T exists such that v is also
      of type T', then T is the most specific type for (or of) v.

(This definition is indeed equivalent to the original in the absence of multiple inheritance, as you
might like to confirm for yourself.) Now we consider the question of what needs to be added to this
simplified definition—which, to avoid confusion, we will refer to henceforth as IM Prescription 8S
(“S” for single)—in order to ensure that every value does still have exactly one most specific type.
       Before we go any further, we should explain why we want this property to hold. In fact, the
reason is easy to see. Suppose it did not hold; suppose that (e.g.) a given value v could be both a
rectangle and a rhombus, and suppose further that type SQUARE has not yet been defined. Clearly,
then, the expression “the most specific type of v” would be ambiguous. To repeat a point already
made in Chapter 12, one undesirable consequence would be that if an operator named Op had been
defined for rectangles and another operator with the same name Op had been defined for rhombi, an
invocation of Op with argument v would be ambiguous. The (partial) solution to this problem is, of
course, to insist that type SQUARE be defined after all. (The other part of the solution is discussed
in the section “Remarks on Operator Inheritance,” q.v.)
       With the foregoing example as motivation, let us now consider the following possible
replacement for IM Prescription 8S:

      If two types T1 and T2 overlap, then they shall have a common subtype T' such that a given
      value is of both types (i.e., T1 and T2) if and only if it is of type T'.

      Note: Two types overlap if and only if they are not disjoint. Moreover, to say that value v is
of types T1 and T2 if and only if it is of type T' is to say, precisely, that the set of values constituting
type T' is the intersection of the sets of values constituting types T1 and T2. We can therefore refer
to type T', informally, as an intersection type (or intersection subtype).
      Now, the point is perhaps not immediately obvious, but this revised version of IM
Prescription 8S does in fact guarantee that most specific types are unique, as required. Before we
can show that this is so, however, we need to dispose of a few degenerate cases:

 ■    Case 1: T1 = T2.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                             347
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                  Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


      If types T1 and T2 are in fact the same type T, then T itself clearly serves as the required
      intersection subtype.

 ■    Case 2: T1 is a proper supertype of T2.

      In this case, T2 is the required intersection subtype.

 ■    Case 3: T1 and T2 are disjoint.

      The revised IM Prescription 8S can even take care of this case, if we include type omega in
      the type graph (type omega itself is the required intersection subtype in this case, of course).
      In other words, we can simplify IM Prescription 8S still further, thus:

      Any two types T1 and T2 shall have a common subtype T' such that a given value is of both
      type T1 and type T2 if and only if it is of type T'.

       Having taken care of these three special cases, we assume for the remainder of this section
(barring explicit statements to the contrary) that (a) T1 and T2 are distinct, (b) they overlap (i.e.,
they do have at least one value in common), and (c) neither is a subtype of the other. This
combination is the most general and interesting case, of course.
       By way of example, consider the type graph shown in Fig. 15.3 (type EQUILATERAL in that
figure consists of polygons whose sides are all the same length). Note that, e.g., types
QUADRILATERAL and EQUILATERAL satisfy the foregoing conditions: They are distinct, they
overlap, and neither is a subtype of the other. But they do have a common subtype, RHOMBUS,
such that it is indeed the case that a polygon that is both quadrilateral and equilateral must be,
precisely, a rhombus. Thus, RHOMBUS is the intersection subtype for types QUADRILATERAL
and EQUILATERAL.
       Note: Just how our model allows the very same value to be of type QUADRILATERAL and
type EQUILATERAL “at the same time,” as it were, is explained in the discussion of the third
“important logical consequence” in the subsection immediately following. Note too that SQUARE
is also a common subtype for types QUADRILATERAL and EQUILATERAL, but it is not the
intersection subtype per se (see the discussion of the fourth “important logical consequence” in the
subsection immediately following).
       For completeness, we give the intersection subtype for every pair of types in Fig. 15.3 that
satisfy the pertinent conditions:
      QUADRILATERAL      and    EQUILATERAL      :     RHOMBUS
      PARALLELOGRAM      and    EQUILATERAL      :     RHOMBUS
      RECTANGLE          and    EQUILATERAL      :     SQUARE
      RECTANGLE          and    RHOMBUS          :     SQUARE




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          348
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                        ┌───────────────┐                        ║
║                        │     POLYGON   │                        ║
║                        └───────┬───────┘                        ║
║                   ┌────────────┴───────────────┐                ║
║                                                                 ║
║            ┌───────────────┐           ┌───────────────┐        ║
║            │ QUADRILATERAL │           │ EQUILATERAL │          ║
║            └──────┬────────┘           └───────────┬───┘        ║
║                                                     │           ║
║            ┌───────────────┐                        │           ║
║            │ PARALLELOGRAM │                        │           ║
║            └──────┬───┬────┘                        │           ║
║           ┌───────┘   └────────────────────────┐    │           ║
║                                                                 ║
║     ┌───────────┐                      ┌───────────────┐        ║
║     │ RECTANGLE │                      │    RHOMBUS    │        ║
║     └──────┬────┘                      └───────┬───────┘        ║
║            └──────────────────┬────────────────┘                ║
║                                                                 ║
║                          ┌────────┐                             ║
║                          │ SQUARE │                             ║
║                          └────────┘                             ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 15.3: Overlapping types must have an intersection subtype


Some Important Logical Consequences

Our revised version of IM Prescription 8S has several very important consequences, which we now
proceed to explain.

Most specific types unique: The first point is that, as desired, it is indeed still the case that every
value has a well-defined, unique, most specific type. For suppose, contrariwise, that there exists
some value v that is of two distinct most specific types, T1 and T2 say, “at the same time.” Observe
that, by definition, neither of T1 and T2 is a subtype of the other (since they are both “most
specific”). By our revised IM Prescription 8S, then, v must also be of some type T' that is a
common subtype of T1 and T2. Furthermore, T' must be a proper subtype of T1 and T2, since
neither of these latter two types is a subtype of the other. But to say that v is of some proper
subtype of (e.g.) T1 is to contradict the hypothesis that T1 was a most specific type for v in the first
place.
       Of course, it is still the case, as it was with single inheritance, that not every value has to have
a leaf type as its most specific type. For example, values can exist whose most specific type is
RECTANGLE and not SQUARE.

Leaf types disjoint: It is also still the case that leaf types are disjoint. For suppose, contrariwise,
that types T1 and T2 are distinct but overlapping leaf types. By our revised IM Prescription 8S,
then, T1 and T2 must have a common subtype T'. Moreover, since T1 and T2 are distinct and are
leaf types, neither is a subtype of the other, and hence T' must be a proper subtype of both. But if
they have a proper subtype, then they are not leaf types after all.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            349
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                   Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


Model of a scalar variable: It follows from the foregoing that our model of a scalar variable as
defined in IM Prescription 9—i.e., as a named ordered triple of the form <DT,MST,v>—is still
valid. It follows further that the FIND_MST algorithm we gave in our discussion of IM Prescription
10 (“specialization by constraint”) in Chapter 14 for computing the most specific type of a given
value still works. For example, suppose we are given a parallelogram p with AC = BD (so p is in
fact a rectangle) and AB = BC (so p is a rhombus also). First, the algorithm will examine the type
constraint for (say) type RECTANGLE, since RECTANGLE is a proper subtype of
PARALLELOGRAM; it will discover that p satisfies that constraint, and so p is certainly of type
RECTANGLE. Next, it will examine the type constraint for type SQUARE, since SQUARE is a
proper subtype of RECTANGLE; it will then discover that p also satisfies the type constraint for
type RHOMBUS, and hence the type constraint for type SQUARE as well. Hence, p is of all four
types PARALLELOGRAM, RECTANGLE, RHOMBUS, and SQUARE, and MST(p) is SQUARE.

Least specific common subtypes unique: Next, observe that the intersection subtype T' required
by our revised IM Prescription 8S must be unique. That is, given overlapping types T1 and T2,
there cannot exist two different types T' and T'', both of which are common subtypes of T1 and T2
and both of which satisfy the conditions of our revised IM Prescription 8S. For if they both satisfy
those conditions, they are both, precisely, the intersection of T1 and T2; hence they are identical. In
other words, if T1 and T2 overlap, they have precisely one least specific common subtype (viz.,
the applicable intersection subtype)—and so, e.g., the situation shown in Fig. 15.4 makes no sense.
(The arcs in that figure are broken in order to indicate that, e.g., T' and T'' are not necessarily
immediate subtypes of T1 and T2.)
╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                          ┌───────────┐                          ║
║                          │     T     │                          ║
║                          └─────┬─────┘                          ║
║                 ┌────── ─ ─────┴─── ─ ─ ──────┐                 ║
║          ┌────────────┐                ┌────────────┐           ║
║          │     T1     │                │     T2     │           ║
║          └───┬────┬───┘                └───┬────┬───┘           ║
║              │    └── ─ ─ ────┐            │    │               ║
║              :    ┌── ─ ─ ────┼──── ─ ─ ───┘    :               ║
║                               └──── ─ ─ ───┐                    ║
║          ┌────────────┐                ┌────────────┐           ║
║          │     T'     │                │     T''    │           ║
║          └────────────┘                └────────────┘           ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 15.4: Another graph that is not a valid type graph

       Incidentally, note that “if and only if” in our revised IM Prescription 8S. In other words,
loosely speaking, not only must two overlapping types have a nonempty common subtype, but if
two types have a nonempty common subtype, then they must overlap. See Fig. 15.3 for several
illustrations of this point.

Any number of overlapping types: Next, our revised IM Prescription 8S needs very little by way
of extension in order to cater for the case where n types all overlap each other for some n > 2. For
example, let types T1, T2, and T3 be such that they overlap pairwise, and let the intersection
subtypes required by IM Prescription 8S be Ta (for T2 and T3), Tb (for T3 and T1), and Tc (for T1




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                         350
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                        Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


and T2). Then types Ta, Tb, and Tc also overlap pairwise, in general; however, the three
intersection subtypes required for these types Ta, Tb, and Tc taken pairwise are in fact all the same
type, T' say. Proof of this fact and development of a concrete example to illustrate it are left as
exercises for the reader.
      Following on from the foregoing discussion, however, we must now point out that type T' is
thus the intersection subtype for three immediate supertypes, viz., Ta, Tb, and Tc! We will return to
this point near the end of the present section.

Most specific common supertypes unique: Next, observe that not only do any given pair of
overlapping types T1 and T2 have exactly one least specific common subtype (as already
explained), they also have exactly one most specific common supertype, as we now show. (You
might want to draw some diagrams as you work through the following explanation.) First of all, T1
and T2 certainly have at least one common supertype: viz., the (unique) applicable root type. Now
suppose they have two distinct common supertypes Ta and Tb, say, neither of which is a subtype of
the other. Note that Ta and Tb also overlap, since they have a common subtype (actually at least
two common subtypes, T1 and T2). Suppose further that Ta and Tb do not have a common proper
subtype T that is a common proper supertype of T1 and T2 (i.e., Ta and Tb are both “most specific”
common supertypes of T1 and T2, loosely speaking). Now rename the types as follows: Rename
T1 and T2 as T' and T'', respectively; rename Ta and Tb as T1 and T2, respectively. Then we have
exactly the invalid situation (excluding the root type T) previously shown in Fig. 15.4! It follows
that the original supertypes Ta and Tb cannot be distinct after all—they must in fact be the same
type. Hence, as stated, T1 and T2 have precisely one most specific common supertype.1

Overlapping regular types have a regular most specific common supertype: Suppose types T1
and T2 overlap and are regular types. Then their most specific common supertype, T say, must be a
regular type also. For suppose not. Let T1 and T2 have possible representations PR1 and PR2,
respectively. Then, in general, each of PR1 and PR2 will be quite independent of the other (since
there is no common source for them to be derived from, because T is a dummy type). Thus, for
example, PR1 might have a component C1 not present in PR2, and PR2 might have a component
C2 not present in PR1.
       Now let T' be the (required) least specific common subtype for types T1 and T2 (T' is required
because T1 and T2 overlap). Then there is no way, in general, for an invocation of the selector
corresponding to PR1 to return a value of type T' (equivalently, of type T2), because that selector
has no argument corresponding to C2. (To put it another way, if that selector invocation returns the
value v, the expression THE_C2(v) is undefined.) Equivalently, specialization by constraint from
type T1 to type T' does not work—and likewise for S by C from type T2 to type T', of course. In
other words, allowing T to be a dummy type leads to a violation of IM Prescription 10.
       Here is an example to illustrate the foregoing discussion. Consider the type graph of Fig. 15.1
once again. While type PARALLELOGRAM could possibly have a dummy type—say

1
  It might help to point out that while the least specific common subtype of T1 and T2 is certainly the intersection of T1
and T2 (loosely speaking), the most specific common supertype of T1 and T2 is not necessarily the union of T1 and T2;
for example, some parallelograms are neither rectangles nor rhombi. It might also help to point out that the very same
type can be both an intersection type and a union type; such would be the case with type SQUARE, for example, if
every square was either a SMALL_SQUARE or a LARGE_SQUARE.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                                          351
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance             Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


PLANE_FIGURE (not shown in Fig. 15.1)—as a proper supertype, type PARALLELOGRAM
itself must be a regular type, because types RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS are overlapping regular
types.

Equality comparisons: Recall from IM Prescription 12 that the comparison X = Y requires the
declared types of X and Y to have a nonempty common supertype. Thus, for example, the following
code fragment is valid:
     VAR RE RECTANGLE ;
     VAR RH RHOMBUS ;

     IF RE = RH THEN ... END IF ;

       The comparison RE = RH here is valid because types RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS do
have a nonempty common subtype (viz., type SQUARE); moreover, it will give TRUE if and only
if the two variables both contain the same value (viz., a value of that common subtype).

TREAT: Recall from IM Prescription 14 that the TREAT invocation TREAT_AS_T(X) requires T
and the declared type of X to have a nonempty common subtype. Thus, for example, the following
code fragment is valid:
     VAR RE RECTANGLE ;
     VAR RH RHOMBUS ;

     RH := TREAT_AS_RHOMBUS ( RE ) ;

      The TREAT invocation here is valid because types RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS do have a
nonempty common subtype; moreover, it will succeed if and only if the current value of variable
RE is of type SQUARE (i.e., if and only if RE currently contains a value of that common subtype).
In other words, the assignment shown is logically equivalent to—and could equally well have been
expressed as—the following:
     RH := TREAT_AS_SQUARE ( RE ) ;

Type testing: Recall from IM Prescription 15 that the type test IS_T(X) requires T and the declared
type of X to have a nonempty common subtype. Thus, for example, the following code fragment is
valid:
     VAR RE RECTANGLE ;
     IF IS_RHOMBUS ( RE ) THEN ... END IF ;

      The type test here is valid because types RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS do have a nonempty
common subtype; moreover, it will give TRUE if and only if the current value of variable RE is of
type SQUARE (i.e., if and only if RE currently contains a value of that common subtype). In other
words, the IF statement shown is logically equivalent to—and could equally well have been
expressed as—the following:
     IF IS_SQUARE ( RE ) THEN ... END IF ;




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                    352
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


An Extended Example

It is our experience that the full implications of all of the foregoing points are far from obvious. We
therefore present another example, rather more complicated than the one given in Fig. 15.3, that
repays careful study. Refer to Fig. 15.5.
╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║                          ┌───────────────┐                      ║
║                          │ QUADRILATERAL │                      ║
║                          └───────┬───────┘                      ║
║              ──────────────────┴───────────────────             ║
║        ┌───────────┐        ┌──────────┐     ┌───────────────┐  ║
║        │ TRAPEZOID ├──┐ │       KITE   ├──┐ │     CYCLIC      │ ║
║        └─────┬─────┘ │ └──┬───────┘ │ │ QUADRILATERAL │         ║
║              │         │       │           │ └┬────────┬─────┘  ║
║              │         └─────│──────────│───│───┐      │        ║
║      ┌───────────────┐         │    ┌─────┼───┘┌───────────┐    ║
║      │ PARALLELOGRAM │ ┌────│────│─────│────┤ ISOSCELES │       ║
║      └───────┬───┬───┘ │       │    │      │   │ TRAPEZOID │    ║
║              │   │       │     │    │      │   └───────────┘    ║
║              │   └─────│────│────│─────│──────────┐             ║
║       ┌─────────────┐ │ ┌──────────┐ │        ┌─────────────┐   ║
║       │ RECTANGLE │──┘ │ RIGHT         │ └───│    RHOMBUS   │   ║
║       └──────┬──────┘       │ KITE     │      └──────┬──────┘   ║
║              │              └─────┬────┘             │          ║
║              └──────────────      │   ───────────────┘          ║
║                           ┌─────────────┐                       ║
║                           │    SQUARE    │                      ║
║                           └─────────────┘                       ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
Fig. 15.5: Overlapping types must have a common subtype (a more complicated example)

Note: We briefly remind you of the definitions of some of the possibly less familiar geometric
terms mentioned in that figure:

 ■    A trapezoid is a quadrilateral with at least one pair of opposite sides parallel. By the way, you
      might or might not be interested to learn that in researching this example we discovered that a
      quadrilateral with two parallel sides is called a trapezoid in the U.S. and a trapezium in the
      U.K., while a quadrilateral with no parallel sides is called a trapezium in the U.S. and a
      trapezoid in the U.K. But we digress.

 ■    A kite is a quadrilateral with mirror symmetry about a diagonal, none of whose included
      angles is greater than 180° (if this latter condition is not satisfied, the quadrilateral is not a kite
      but a dart). If ABCD is a kite that is symmetric about diagonal AC, then AB = AD and CB =
      CD.

 ■    A cyclic quadrilateral is a quadrilateral whose vertices lie on a circle. A quadrilateral is cyclic
      if and only if its opposite angles add up to 180°.

 ■    An isosceles trapezoid is a trapezoid with mirror symmetry about the line that connects the
      midpoints of its parallel sides. If ABCD is an isosceles trapezoid with AB parallel to CD,




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                             353
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance               Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


      then BC = AD and the included angles at A and B are equal, as are the included angles at C
      and D.

 ■    A right kite is a kite in which the angles subtended by the diagonal of symmetry are right
      angles (if ABCD is a kite that is symmetric about diagonal AC, then the angles at B and D are
      right angles).

“IM Prescription 8S” Revisited

We can now take care of a piece of unfinished business. In the subsection “Some Important Logical
Consequences,” we said that our revised IM Prescription 8S required very little extension to cater
for the case of n mutually overlapping types where n > 2. However, our discussion of the issue
quickly led to the need for a type T' that was the intersection subtype for three immediate
supertypes Ta, Tb, and Tc, and so some extension is definitely needed. In fact, it should be clear,
without having to go through a lot of detailed analysis, that all of the ideas we have been discussing
do extend very straightforwardly to the case n > 2. Thus, we arrive at the following as the final and
most general version of IM Prescription 8S:

      Every set of types T1, T2, ..., Tn shall have a common subtype T' such that a given value is of
      each of the types T1, T2, ..., Tn if and only if it is of type T'.

        The value n here is an arbitrary nonnegative integer. Type T' is the unique intersection
subtype—also known as the least specific common subtype—for types T1, T2, ..., Tn. Analogously,
of course, types T1, T2, ..., Tn also have a unique most specific common supertype T (and T must be
a regular type if T1, T2, ..., Tn are regular types and T' is nonempty).
        Observe now that the formulation of “IM Prescription 8S” just given is in fact identical to the
formulation we originally gave for IM Prescription 8 in Chapter 14! So we can drop our references
to “IM Prescription 8S” as such from this point forward, and we will.
        By way of an example to illustrate the foregoing, consider what happens if we delete types
PARALLELOGRAM, ISOSCELES TRAPEZOID, RECTANGLE, RIGHT KITE, and RHOMBUS
from the type graph of Fig. 15.5 (thus leaving QUADRILATERAL with three immediate subtypes,
each of which is an immediate supertype of SQUARE).
        One final point to close this section (repeated from Chapter 12): It should be clear that, sadly,
it is always possible to make mistakes in setting up the type graph. For example, we might define
the overlapping types RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS and forget to define the necessary
intersection subtype SQUARE. The consequences of such mistakes will be unpredictable, in
general; it is to be hoped that some kind of mechanical aid would be available in practice to help the
person designing the type graph to avoid them.


REMARKS ON OPERATOR INHERITANCE

In this, the final section of the chapter, we turn our attention to two remaining issues. First,
consider types RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS once again. Both of these types inherit the read-
only operator AREA from type PARALLELOGRAM, and hence—as noted earlier in this chapter—




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                          354
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


type SQUARE inherits that operator from both of its immediate supertypes. What are the
implications of this fact?
      Well, if AREA is reimplemented for type SQUARE, there is no problem: An invocation
AREA(s), where s is of most specific type SQUARE, will unambiguously refer to the version of
AREA that has been defined for type SQUARE. But, of course, we would like to avoid such
reimplementation as much as we reasonably can. Suppose, therefore, that AREA is not
reimplemented for type SQUARE. Now there are two possibilities:

 ■   If the semantics of the RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS versions of the AREA operator are the
     same—i.e., if the expression AREA(s) gives the same result, no matter whether the
     RECTANGLE version or the RHOMBUS version of AREA is invoked—then again there is
     no problem. (No problem so far as the model is concerned, that is. There will still have to be
     a way of telling the system which of the two versions is to be invoked. But this fact is of no
     concern to someone who is merely making use of type SQUARE; it is an implementation
     issue, not a model issue.)

 ■   However, if the semantics of the RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS versions of the AREA
     operator differ, then it matters very much which version is inherited by type SQUARE. But
     now we face a logical absurdity! To say that SQUARE is a subtype of both RECTANGLE
     and RHOMBUS is to say that any given square is both a rectangle and a rhombus. But to go
     on and say that the area of that square depends on whether we think of it as a rectangle or as a
     rhombus is surely nonsense.
          As with our discussion of the TRAVEL_TIME operator in Chapter 14, therefore, we will
     set a stake in the ground here—as IM Prescription 17 in fact requires us to do—and insist that
     the semantics of the RECTANGLE and RHOMBUS versions of the AREA operator must not
     differ. (If they do, then the implementation is in violation; i.e., it is not an implementation of
     the model, and the implications are unpredictable.)

      Now we turn to the second issue. Suppose some operator Op has been defined for rectangles
and another operator with the same name Op has been defined for rhombi; suppose further that
these operators are not inherited from parallelograms—i.e., there is no operator Op for type
PARALLELOGRAM. Suppose also for simplicity that each of these operators takes just one
parameter (of type RECTANGLE and type RHOMBUS, respectively). Suppose still further that the
two operators named Op are really different operators (i.e., Op is overloaded). What do we do
about the inheritance of Op by type SQUARE?
      On the face of it, there is a problem here: By the very notion of type inheritance, both
operators must indeed be inherited by type SQUARE, and an invocation Op(s), where s is of type
SQUARE, would thus be ambiguous. Clearly, therefore, we must prohibit such a situation from
arising in the first place. But that is exactly what the following rule (part of IM Prescription 17)
does:

     Let S be a set of types with a nonempty common subtype. Then no two distinct operators
     shall have specification signatures that differ only in that, for some i, j, ..., k, the declared
     types of their ith parameters are distinct members of S, the declared types of their jth




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                              355
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance                 Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


       parameters are distinct members of S, ..., and the declared types of their kth parameters are
       distinct members of S.

Note: We do not expect this rule to cause significant hardship in practice, because the system
should be able to detect violations as soon as they occur (i.e., at “operator definition time”).


EXERCISES

15.1    Repeat Exercise 12.11—”Define an operator to rotate a specified rectangle through 90°
        about its center”—using the definition given for type RECTANGLE in this chapter.

15.2    Provide Tutorial D code for the operators AREA, CTR, CIR_CIRCLE, IN_CIRCLE, and
        ANNULUS from the section “An Introductory Example” (subsection “Operators”) in the
        body of this chapter.

15.3    Identify all of the intersection types in Fig. 15.5.

15.4    Is type QUADRILATERAL in Fig. 15.5 a union type? If it is, do you think it should be a
        dummy type? Justify your answers.

15.5    How many possreps can you think of for type RIGHT KITE from Fig. 15.5? Write a
        Tutorial D definition for that type.

15.6    Give a concrete example of distinct types A, B, C, D, E such that A and B have C as a
        subtype and C has D and E as subtypes. Note: One such example was mentioned in passing
        in the body of the chapter (where?); you can give that example as your answer if you like,
        but we would prefer you to invent one of your own.

15.7    The definition of type graph in the body of the chapter includes the following: If nodes T1,
        T2, T', and T'' are such that there exist paths from both T1 and T2 to both T' and T'', then
        there must exist a node T that is common to all of those paths. Show that this point is a
        logical consequence of IM Prescription 8.

15.8    (Paraphrased from the body of the chapter) Let types T1, T2, and T3 overlap pairwise, and
        let the corresponding intersection subtypes be Ta (for T2 and T3), Tb (for T3 and T1), and Tc
        (for T1 and T2). Show that:

        ●    Types Ta, Tb, and Tc also overlap pairwise, in general.

        ●    The three intersection subtypes required for these types Ta, Tb, and Tc taken pairwise
             are in fact all the same type.

        (Drawing a Venn diagram will help you visualize this situation and might suggest a proof.)
        Also give a concrete example to illustrate the foregoing possibility.




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                            356
Part IV / Subtyping and Inheritance             Chapter 15 / Multiple Inheritance with Scalar Types


15.9   Let RATIONAL_p_q (p  1, q  0) be a family of types such that a value v is a value of type
       RATIONAL_p_q if and only if it is a number whose decimal representation takes the form
       int.frac, where:

       ●   int and frac are both sequences of decimal digits.

       ●   int involves no more than p-q digits (leading zeros are insignificant and can be
           dropped).

       ●   frac involves no more than q digits (trailing zeros are insignificant and can be dropped).

       Do you agree that type RATIONAL_p'_q' is a subtype of type RATIONAL_p_q if and only
       if p'  p and q'  q? Do you agree that we have a case of multiple inheritance on our hands?
       What are the corresponding root types? Are those root types dummy types? Does value
       substitutability apply? Are there any operators that apply to values of type
       RATIONAL_p'_q' and not to values of type RATIONAL_p_q? Does S by C apply? Is
       there a nonempty type that is a subtype of all possible types in the family?

15.10 Following on from the previous exercise, consider the literal 0012.30. What is the declared
      type of this literal? What is the most specific type? What is the least specific type?

15.11 Again following on from Exercise 15.9, what is the relationship of type INTEGER to the
      RATIONAL_p_q family?




Copyright © 2014 C. J. Date and Hugh Darwen                                                      357